The Iliad of Homer 
Translated by Alexander Pope, 
with notes by the 
Rev. Theodore Alois Buckley, M.A., F.S.A. 
and 
Flaxmana__s Designs. 
1899 
Contents 
INTRODUCTION. 
POPEa__S PREFACE TO THE ILIAD OF HOMER 
BOOK I. 
BOOK II. 
BOOK III. 
BOOK IV. 
BOOK V. 
BOOK VI. 
BOOK VII. 
BOOK VIII. 
BOOK IX. 
BOOK X. 
BOOK XI. 
BOOK XII. 
BOOK XIII. 
BOOK XIV. 
BOOK XV. 
BOOK XVI. 
BOOK XVII. 
BOOK XVIII. 
BOOK XIX. 
BOOK XX. 
BOOK XXI. 
BOOK XXII. 
BOOK XXIII. 
BOOK XXIV. 
CONCLUDING NOTE. 
Illustrations 
HOMER INVOKING THE MUSE. 
MARS. 
MINERVA REPRESSING THE FURY OF ACHILLES. 
THE DEPARTURE OF BRISEIS FROM THE TENT OF ACHILLES. 
THETIS CALLING BRIAREUS TO THE ASSISTANCE OF JUPITER. 
THETIS ENTREATING JUPITER TO HONOUR ACHILLES. 
VULCAN. 
JUPITER. 
THE APOTHEOSIS OF HOMER. 
JUPITER SENDING THE EVIL DREAM TO AGAMEMNON. 
NEPTUNE. 
VENUS, DISGUISED, INVITING HELEN TO THE CHAMBER OF PARIS. 
VENUS PRESENTING HELEN TO PARIS. 
VENUS. 
Map, titled a_oeGraeciae Antiquaea__. 
THE COUNCIL OF THE GODS. 
Map of the Plain of Troy. 
VENUS, WOUNDED IN THE HAND, CONDUCTED BY IRIS TO MARS. 
OTUS AND EPHIALTES HOLDING MARS CAPTIVE. 
DIOMED CASTING HIS SPEAR AT MARS. 
JUNO. 
HECTOR CHIDING PARIS. 
THE MEETING OF HECTOR AND ANDROMACHE. 
BOWS AND BOW CASE. 
IRIS. 
HECTOR AND AJAX SEPARATED BY THE HERALDS. 
GREEK AMPHORAa_"WINE VESSELS. 
JUNO AND MINERVA GOING TO ASSIST THE GREEKS. 
THE HOURS TAKING THE HORSES FROM JUNOa__S CAR. 
THE SHIELD OF ACHILLES. 
PLUTO. 
THE EMBASSY TO ACHILLES. 
GREEK GALLEY. 
PROSERPINE. 
ACHILLES. 
DIOMED AND ULYSSES RETURNING WITH THE SPOILS OF RHESUS. 
THE DESCENT OF DISCORD. 
HERCULES. 
POLYDAMAS ADVISING HECTOR. 
GREEK ALTAR. 
NEPTUNE RISING FROM THE SEA. 
GREEK EARRINGS. 
SLEEP ESCAPING FROM THE WRATH OF JUPITER. 
GREEK SHIELD. 
BACCHUS. 
AJAX DEFENDING THE GREEK SHIPS. 
CASTOR AND POLLUX. 
Buckles. 
DIANA. 
SLEEP AND DEATH CONVEYING THE BODY OF SARPEDON TO LYCIA. 
A_SCULAPIUS. 
FIGHT FOR THE BODY OF PATROCLUS. 
VULCAN FROM AN ANTIQUE GEM. 
THETIS ORDERING THE NEREIDS TO DESCEND INTO THE SEA. 
JUNO COMMANDING THE SUN TO SET. 
TRIPOD. 
THETIS AND EURYNOME RECEIVING THE INFANT VULCAN. 
VULCAN AND CHARIS RECEIVING THETIS. 
THETIS BRINGING THE ARMOUR TO ACHILLES. 
HERCULES. 
THE GODS DESCENDING TO BATTLE. 
CENTAUR. 
ACHILLES CONTENDING WITH THE RIVERS. 
THE BATH. 
ANDROMACHE FAINTING ON THE WALL. 
THE FUNERAL PILE OF PATROCLUS. 
CERES. 
HECTORa__S BODY AT THE CAR OF ACHILLES. 
THE JUDGMENT OF PARIS. 
IRIS ADVISES PRIAM TO OBTAIN THE BODY OF HECTOR. 
FUNERAL OF HECTOR. 
[pg ix] 
INTRODUCTION. 
Scepticism is as much the result of knowledge, as knowledge is of 
scepticism. To be content with what we at present know, is, for the 
most part, to shut our ears against conviction; since, from the very 
gradual character of our education, we must continually forget, and 
emancipate ourselves from, knowledge previously acquired; we must set 
aside old notions and embrace fresh ones; and, as we learn, we must be 
daily unlearning something which it has cost us no small labour and 
anxiety to acquire. 
And this difficulty attaches itself more closely to an age in which 
progress has gained a strong ascendency over prejudice, and in which 
persons and things are, day by day, finding their real level, in lieu 
of their conventional value. The same principles which have swept away 
traditional abuses, and which are making rapid havoc among the revenues 
of sinecurists, and stripping the thin, tawdry veil from attractive 
superstitions, are working as actively in literature as in society. The 
credulity of one writer, or the partiality of another, finds as 
powerful a touchstone and as wholesome a chastisement in the healthy 
scepticism of a temperate class of antagonists, as the dreams of 
conservatism, or the impostures of pluralist sinecures in the Church. 
History and tradition, whether of ancient or comparatively recent 
times, are subjected to very different handling from that which the 
indulgence or credulity of former ages could allow. Mere statements are 
jealously watched, and the motives of the writer form as important an 
ingredient in the analysis of his history, as the facts he records. 
Probability is a powerful and troublesome test; and it is by this 
troublesome standard that a large portion of historical evidence is 
sifted. Consistency is no less pertinacious and exacting in its 
demands. In brief, to write a history, we must know more than mere 
facts. Human nature, viewed under an induction of extended experience, 
is the best help to the criticism of human history. Historical 
characters can only be estimated by the standard which human 
experience, whether actual or traditionary, has furnished. To form 
correct views of individuals we must regard them as forming parts of a 
great wholea_"we must measure them by their relation to the mass of 
beings by whom they are surrounded, and, in contemplating the incidents 
in their[pg x] lives or condition which tradition has handed down to 
us, we must rather consider the general bearing of the whole narrative, 
than the respective probability of its details. 
It is unfortunate for us, that, of some of the greatest men, we know 
least, and talk most. Homer, Socrates, and Shakespere1 have, perhaps, 
contributed more to the intellectual enlightenment of mankind than any 
other three writers who could be named, and yet the history of all 
three has given rise to a boundless ocean of discussion, which has left 
us little save the option of choosing which theory or theories we will 
follow. The personality of Shakespere is, perhaps, the only thing in 
which critics will allow us to believe without controversy; but upon 
everything else, even down to the authorship of plays, there is more or 
less of doubt and uncertainty. Of Socrates we know as little as the 
contradictions of Plato and Xenophon will allow us to know. He was one 
of the _dramatis personae_ in two dramas as unlike in principles as in 
style. He appears as the enunciator of opinions as different in their 
tone as those of the writers who have handed them down. When we have 
read Plato _or_ Xenophon, we think we know something of Socrates; when 
we have fairly read and examined both, we feel convinced that we are 
something worse than ignorant. 
It has been an easy, and a popular expedient, of late years, to deny 
the personal or real existence of men and things whose life and 
condition were too much for our belief. This systema_"which has often 
comforted the religious sceptic, and substituted the consolations of 
Strauss for those of the New Testamenta_"has been of incalculable value 
to the historical theorists of the last and present centuries. To 
question the existence of Alexander the Great, would be a more 
excusable act, than to believe in that of Romulus. To deny a fact 
related in Herodotus, because it is inconsistent with a theory 
developed from an Assyrian inscription which no two scholars read in 
the same way, is more pardonable, than to believe in the good-natured 
old king whom the elegant pen of Florian has idealizeda_"_Numa 
Pompilius._ 
Scepticism has attained its culminating point with respect to Homer, 
and the state of our Homeric knowledge may be described as a free 
permission to believe any theory, provided we throw overboard[pg xi] 
all written tradition, concerning the author or authors of the Iliad 
and Odyssey. What few authorities exist on the subject, are summarily 
dismissed, although the arguments appear to run in a circle. a_oeThis 
cannot be true, because it is not true; and, that is not true, because 
it cannot be true.a__ Such seems to be the style, in which testimony upon 
testimony, statement upon statement, is consigned to denial and 
oblivion. 
It is, however, unfortunate that the professed biographies of Homer are 
partly forgeries, partly freaks of ingenuity and imagination, in which 
truth is the requisite most wanting. Before taking a brief review of 
the Homeric theory in its present conditions, some notice must be taken 
of the treatise on the Life of Homer which has been attributed to 
Herodotus. 
According to this document, the city of Cumae in A_olia, was, at an 
early period, the seat of frequent immigrations from various parts of 
Greece. Among the immigrants was Menapolus, the son of Ithagenes. 
Although poor, he married, and the result of the union was a girl named 
Critheis. The girl was left an orphan at an early age, under the 
guardianship of Cleanax, of Argos. It is to the indiscretion of this 
maiden that we a_oeare indebted for so much happiness.a__ Homer was the 
first fruit of her juvenile frailty, and received the name of 
Melesigenes, from having been born near the river Meles, in Boeotia, 
whither Critheis had been transported in order to save her reputation. 
a_oeAt this time,a__ continues our narrative, a_oethere lived at Smyrna a man 
named Phemius, a teacher of literature and music, who, not being 
married, engaged Critheis to manage his household, and spin the flax he 
received as the price of his scholastic labours. So satisfactory was 
her performance of this task, and so modest her conduct, that he made 
proposals of marriage, declaring himself, as a further inducement, 
willing to adopt her son, who, he asserted, would become a clever man, 
if he were carefully brought up.a__ 
They were married; careful cultivation ripened the talents which nature 
had bestowed, and Melesigenes soon surpassed his schoolfellows in every 
attainment, and, when older, rivalled his preceptor in wisdom. Phemius 
died, leaving him sole heir to his property, and his mother soon 
followed. Melesigenes carried on his adopted fathera__s school with great 
success, exciting the admiration not only of the inhabitants of Smyrna, 
but also of the strangers whom the trade carried on there, especially 
in the exportation of corn, attracted to that city. Among these 
visitors, one Mentes, from Leucadia, the modern Santa Maura, who 
evinced a knowledge and intelligence rarely found in those times, 
persuaded Melesigenes to close his school, and accompany him on his 
travels. He promised not only to pay his expenses, but to furnish him 
with a further stipend, urging, that, a_oeWhile he was yet young, it was 
fitting that he should see with his own eyes the countries and cities 
which might hereafter be the subjects of his discourses.a__ Melesigenes 
consented, and set out with his patron, a_oeexamining all the curiosities 
of the countries they visited, and informing himself of everything by 
interrogating those whom he met.a__ We may also suppose, that he[pg xii] 
wrote memoirs of all that he deemed worthy of preservation2 Having set 
sail from Tyrrhenia and Iberia, they reached Ithaca. Here Melesigenes, 
who had already suffered in his eyes, became much worse, and Mentes, 
who was about to leave for Leucadia, left him to the medical 
superintendence of a friend of his, named Mentor, the son of Alcinor. 
Under his hospitable and intelligent host, Melesigenes rapidly became 
acquainted with the legends respecting Ulysses, which afterwards formed 
the subject of the Odyssey. The inhabitants of Ithaca assert, that it 
was here that Melesigenes became blind, but the Colophomans make their 
city the seat of that misfortune. He then returned to Smyrna, where he 
applied himself to the study of poetry.3 
But poverty soon drove him to Cumae. Having passed over the Hermaean 
plain, he arrived at Neon Teichos, the New Wall, a colony of Cumae. 
Here his misfortunes and poetical talent gained him the friendship of 
one Tychias, an armourer. a_oeAnd up to my time,a__ continued the author, 
a_oethe inhabitants showed the place where he used to sit when giving a 
recitation of his verses, and they greatly honoured the spot. Here also 
a poplar grew, which they said had sprung up ever since Melesigenes 
arriveda__.4 
But poverty still drove him on, and he went by way of Larissa, as being 
the most convenient road. Here, the Cumans say, he composed an epitaph 
on Gordius, king of Phrygia, which has however, and with greater 
probability, been attributed to Cleobulus of Lindus.5 
Arrived at Cumae, he frequented the _converzationes_6 of the old men, 
and delighted all by the charms of his poetry. Encouraged by this 
favourable reception, he declared that, if they would allow him a 
public maintenance, he would render their city most gloriously 
renowned.[pg xiii] They avowed their willingness to support him in the 
measure he proposed, and procured him an audience in the council. 
Having made the speech, with the purport of which our author has 
forgotten to acquaint us, he retired, and left them to debate 
respecting the answer to be given to his proposal. 
The greater part of the assembly seemed favourable to the poeta__s 
demand, but one man observed that a_oeif they were to feed _Homers,_ they 
would be encumbered with a multitude of useless people.a__ a_oeFrom this 
circumstance,a__ says the writer, a_oeMelesigenes acquired the name of 
Homer, for the Cumans call blind men _Homers._a__7 With a love of 
economy, which shows how similar the world has always been in its 
treatment of literary men, the pension was denied, and the poet vented 
his disappointment in a wish that Cumoea might never produce a poet 
capable of giving it renown and glory. 
At Phocoea, Homer was destined to experience another literary distress. 
One Thestorides, who aimed at the reputation of poetical genius, kept 
Homer in his own house, and allowed him a pittance, on condition of the 
verses of the poet passing in his name. Having collected sufficient 
poetry to be profitable, Thestorides, like some would-be-literary 
publishers, neglected the man whose brains he had sucked, and left him. 
At his departure, Homer is said to have observed: a_oeO Thestorides, of 
the many things hidden from the knowledge of man, nothing is more 
unintelligible than the human heart.a__8 
Homer continued his career of difficulty and distress, until some Chian 
merchants, struck by the similarity of the verses they heard him 
recite, acquainted him with the fact that Thestorides was pursuing a 
profitable livelihood by the recital of the very same poems. This at 
once determined him to set out for Chios. No vessel happened then to be 
setting sail thither, but he found one ready to Start for Erythrae, a 
town of Ionia, which faces that island, and he prevailed upon the 
seamen to allow him to accompany them. Having embarked, he invoked a 
favourable wind, and prayed that he might be able to expose the 
imposture of Thestorides, who, by his breach of hospitality, had drawn 
down the wrath of Jove the Hospitable. 
At Erythrae, Homer fortunately met with a person who had known him in 
Phocoea, by whose assistance he at length, after some difficulty, 
reached the little hamlet of Pithys. Here he met with an adventure, 
which we will continue in the words of our author. a_oeHaving set out from 
Pithys, Homer went on, attracted by the cries of some goats that were 
pasturing. The dogs barked on his approach, and he cried out. Glaucus 
(for that was the name of the goat-herd) heard his voice, ran up 
quickly, called off his dogs, and drove them away from Homer. For or 
some time he stood wondering how a blind man should have[pg xiv] 
reached such a place alone, and what could be his design in coming. He 
then went up to him, and inquired who he was, and how he had come to 
desolate places and untrodden spots, and of what he stood in need. 
Homer, by recounting to him the whole history of his misfortunes, moved 
him with compassion; and he took him, and led him to his cot, and 
having lit a fire, bade him sup.9 
a_oeThe dogs, instead of eating, kept barking at the stranger, according 
to their usual habit. Whereupon Homer addressed Glaucus thus: O 
Glaucus, my friend, prythee attend to my behest. First give the dogs 
their supper at the doors of the hut: for so it is better, since, 
whilst they watch, nor thief nor wild beast will approach the fold. 
Glaucus was pleased with the advice, and marvelled at its author. 
Having finished supper, they banqueted10 afresh on conversation, Homer 
narrating his wanderings, and telling of the cities he had visited. 
At length they retired to rest; but on the following morning, Glaucus 
resolved to go to his master, and acquaint him with his meeting with 
Homer. Having left the goats in charge of a fellow-servant, he left 
Homer at home, promising to return quickly. Having arrived at Bolissus, 
a place near the farm, and finding his mate, he told him the whole 
story respecting Homer and his journey. He paid little attention to 
what he said, and blamed Glaucus for his stupidity in taking in and 
feeding maimed and enfeebled persons. However, he bade him bring the 
stranger to him. 
Glaucus told Homer what had taken place, and bade him follow him, 
assuring him that good fortune would be the result. Conversation soon 
showed that the stranger was a man of much cleverness and general 
knowledge, and the Chian persuaded him to remain, and to undertake the 
charge of his children.11 
Besides the satisfaction of driving the impostor Thestorides from the 
island, Homer enjoyed considerable success as a teacher. In the town of 
Chios he established a school where he taught the precepts of poetry. 
a_oeTo this day,a__ says Chandler,12 a_oethe most curious remain is that which 
has been named, without reason, the School of Homer. It is on the 
coast, at some distance from the city, northward, and appears to have 
been an open temple of Cybele, formed on the top of a rock. The shape 
is oval, and in the centre is the image of the goddess, the[pg xv] head 
and an arm wanting. She is represented, as usual, sitting. The chair 
has a lion carved on each side, and on the back. The area is bounded by 
a low rim, or seat, and about five yards over. The whole is hewn out of 
the mountain, is rude, indistinct, and probably of the most remote 
antiquity.a__ 
So successful was this school, that Homer realised a considerable 
fortune. He married, and had two daughters, one of whom died single, 
the other married a Chian. 
The following passage betrays the same tendency to connect the 
personages of the poems with the history of the poet, which has already 
been mentioned:a_" 
a_oeIn his poetical compositions Homer displays great gratitude towards 
Mentor of Ithaca, in the Odyssey, whose name he has inserted in his 
poem as the companion of Ulysses,13 in return for the care taken of him 
when afflicted with blindness. He also testifies his gratitude to 
Phemius, who had given him both sustenance and instruction.a__ 
His celebrity continued to increase, and many persons advised him to 
visit Greece, whither his reputation had now extended. Having, it is 
said, made some additions to his poems calculated to please the vanity 
of the Athenians, of whose city he had hitherto made no mention,14 he 
sent out for Samos. Here being recognized by a Samian, who had met with 
him in Chios, he was handsomely received, and invited to join in 
celebrating the Apaturian festival. He recited some verses, which gave 
great satisfaction, and by singing the Eiresione at the New Moon 
festivals, he earned a subsistence, visiting the houses of the rich, 
with whose children he was very popular. 
In the spring he sailed for Athens, and arrived at the island of Ios, 
now Ino, where he fell extremely ill, and died. It is said that his 
death arose from vexation, at not having been able to unravel an enigma 
proposed by some fishermena__s children.15 
Such is, in brief, the substance of the earliest life of Homer we 
possess, and so broad are the evidences of its historical 
worthlessness, that it is scarcely necessary to point them out in 
detail. Let us now consider some of the opinions to which a 
persevering, patient, and learneda_"but by no means consistenta_"series of 
investigations has led. In doing so, I profess to bring forward 
statements, not to vouch for their reasonableness or probability. 
a_oeHomer appeared. The history of this poet and his works is lost in 
doubtful obscurity, as is the history of many of the first minds who 
have done honour to humanity, because they rose amidst darkness. The 
majestic stream of his song, blessing and fertilizing, flows like the 
Nile, through many lands and nations; and, like the sources of the 
Nile, its fountains will ever remain concealed.a__ 
[pg xvi] Such are the words in which one of the most judicious German 
critics has eloquently described the uncertainty in which the whole of 
the Homeric question is involved. With no less truth and feeling he 
proceeds:a_" 
a_oeIt seems here of chief importance to expect no more than the nature of 
things makes possible. If the period of tradition in history is the 
region of twilight, we should not expect in it perfect light. The 
creations of genius always seem like miracles, because they are, for 
the most part, created far out of the reach of observation. If we were 
in possession of all the historical testimonies, we never could wholly 
explain the origin of the Iliad and the Odyssey; for their origin, in 
all essential points, must have remained the secret of the poet.a__ 16 
From this criticism, which shows as much insight into the depths of 
human nature as into the minute wire-drawings of scholastic 
investigation, let us pass on to the main question at issue. Was Homer 
an individual?17 or were the Iliad and Odyssey the result of an 
ingenious arrangement of fragments by earlier poets? 
Well has Landor remarked: a_oeSome tell us there were twenty Homers; some 
deny that there was ever one. It were idle and foolish to shake the 
contents of a vase, in order to let them settle at last. We are 
perpetually labouring to destroy our delights, our composure, our 
devotion to superior power. Of all the animals on earth we least know 
what is good for us. My opinion is, that what is best for us is our 
admiration of good. No man living venerates Homer more than I do.a__ 18 
But, greatly as we admire the generous enthusiasm which rests contented 
with the poetry on which its best impulses had been nurtured and 
fostered, without seeking to destroy the vividness of first impressions 
by minute analysisa_"our editorial office compels us to give some 
attention to the doubts and difficulties with which the Homeric 
question is beset, and to entreat our reader, for a brief period, to 
prefer his judgment to his imagination, and to condescend to dry 
details. 
Before, however, entering into particulars respecting the question of 
this unity of the Homeric poems, (at least of the Iliad,) I must 
express my sympathy with the sentiments expressed in the following 
remarks:a_" 
a_oeWe cannot but think the universal admiration of its unity by the 
better, the poetic age of Greece, almost conclusive testimony to its 
original composition. It was not till the age of the grammarians that 
its primitive integrity was called in question; nor is it injustice to 
assert, that the minute and analytical spirit of a grammarian is not 
the best qualification for the profound feeling, the comprehensive 
conception of an harmonious whole. The most exquisite anatomist may be 
no judge of the symmetry of the human frame: and we would take the 
opinion of Chantrey or Westmacott on the proportions and general beauty 
of a form, rather than that of Mr. Brodie or Sir Astley Cooper. 
[pg xvii] a_oeThere is some truth, though some malicious exaggeration, in 
the lines of Pope.a_" 
a_oea__The critic eyea_"that microscope of wit 
Sees hairs and pores, examines bit by bit, 
How parts relate to parts, or they to whole 
The bodya__s harmony, the beaming soul, 
Are things which Kuster, Burmann, Wasse, shall see, 
When mana__s whole frame is obvious to a flea.a__a__19 
Long was the time which elapsed before any one dreamt of questioning the unity of the authorship of the Homeric poems. The grave and cautious Thucydides quoted without hesitation the Hymn to Apollo,20 the authenticity of which has been already disclaimed by modern critics. Longinus, in an oft quoted passage, merely expressed an opinion touching the comparative inferiority of the Odyssey to the Iliad,21 and, among a mass of ancient authors, whose very names22 it would be tedious to detail, no suspicion of the personal non-existence of Homer ever arose. So far, the voice of antiquity seems to be in favour of our early ideas on the subject; let us now see what are the discoveries to which more modern investigations lay claim. 
At the end of the seventeenth century, doubts had begun to awaken on 
the subject, and we find Bentley remarking that a_oeHomer wrote a sequel 
of songs and rhapsodies, to be sung by himself, for small comings and 
good cheer, at festivals and other days of merriment. These loose songs 
were not collected together, in the form of an epic poem, till about 
Peisistratusa__ time, about five hundred years after.a__23 
Two French writersa_"Hedelin and Perraulta_"avowed a similar scepticism on 
the subject; but it is in the a_oeScienza Nuovaa__ of Battista Vico, that we 
first meet with the germ of the theory, subsequently defended by Wolf 
with so much learning and acuteness. Indeed, it is with the Wolfian 
theory that we have chiefly to deal, and with the following bold 
hypothesis, which we will detail in the words of Grote24a_" 
a_oeHalf a century ago, the acute and valuable Prolegomena of F. A. Wolf, 
turning to account the Venetian Scholia, which had then been[pg xviii] 
recently published, first opened philosophical discussion as to the 
history of the Homeric text. A considerable part of that dissertation 
(though by no means the whole) is employed in vindicating the position, 
previously announced by Bentley, amongst others, that the separate 
constituent portions of the Iliad and Odyssey had not been cemented 
together into any compact body and unchangeable order, until the days 
of Peisistratus, in the sixth century before Christ. As a step towards 
that conclusion, Wolf maintained that no written copies of either poem 
could be shown to have existed during the earlier times, to which their 
composition is referred; and that without writing, neither the perfect 
symmetry of so complicated a work could have been originally conceived 
by any poet, nor, if realized by him, transmitted with assurance to 
posterity. The absence of easy and convenient writing, such as must be 
indispensably supposed for long manuscripts, among the early Greeks, 
was thus one of the points in Wolfa__s case against the primitive 
integrity of the Iliad and Odyssey. By Nitzsch, and other leading 
opponents of Wolf, the connection of the one with the other seems to 
have been accepted as he originally put it; and it has been considered 
incumbent on those who defended the ancient aggregate character of the 
Iliad and Odyssey, to maintain that they were written poems from the 
beginning. 
a_oeTo me it appears, that the architectonic functions ascribed by Wolf to 
Peisistratus and his associates, in reference to the Homeric poems, are 
nowise admissible. But much would undoubtedly be gained towards that 
view of the question, if it could be shown, that, in order to 
controvert it, we were driven to the necessity of admitting long 
written poems, in the ninth century before the Christian aera. Few 
things, in my opinion, can be more improbable; and Mr. Payne Knight, 
opposed as he is to the Wolfian hypothesis, admits this no less than 
Wolf himself. The traces of writing in Greece, even in the seventh 
century before the Christian aera, are exceedingly trifling. We have no 
remaining inscription earlier than the fortieth Olympiad, and the early 
inscriptions are rude and unskilfully executed; nor can we even assure 
ourselves whether Archilochus, Simonides of Amorgus, Kallinus, 
Tyrtaeus, Xanthus, and the other early elegiac and lyric poets, 
committed their compositions to writing, or at what time the practice 
of doing so became familiar. The first positive ground which authorizes 
us to presume the existence of a manuscript of Homer, is in the famous 
ordinance of Solon, with regard to the rhapsodies at the Panathenaea: 
but for what length of time previously manuscripts had existed, we are 
unable to say. 
a_oeThose who maintain the Homeric poems to have been written from the 
beginning, rest their case, not upon positive proofs, nor yet upon the 
existing habits of society with regard to poetrya_"for they admit 
generally that the Iliad and Odyssey were not read, but recited and 
heard,a_"but upon the supposed necessity that there must have been 
manuscripts to ensure the preservation of the poemsa_"the unassisted 
memory of reciters being neither sufficient nor trustworthy. But here 
we only escape a smaller difficulty by running into a greater; for the 
existence of trained bards, gifted with extraordinary memory,[pg xix] 
25 is far less astonishing than that of long manuscripts, in an age 
essentially non-reading and non-writing, and when even suitable 
instruments and materials for the process are not obvious. Moreover, 
there is a strong positive reason for believing that the bard was under 
no necessity of refreshing his memory by consulting a manuscript; for 
if such had been the fact, blindness would have been a disqualification 
for the profession, which we know that it was not, as well from the 
example of Demodokus, in the Odyssey, as from that of the blind bard of 
Chios, in the Hymn to the Delian Apollo, whom Thucydides, as well as 
the general tenor of Grecian legend, identifies with Homer himself. The 
author of that hymn, be he who he may, could never have described a 
blind man as attaining the utmost perfection in his art, if he had been 
conscious that the memory of the bard was only maintained by constant 
reference to the manuscript in his chest.a__ 
The loss of the digamma, that _crux_ of critics, that quicksand upon 
which even the acumen of Bentley was shipwrecked, seems to prove beyond 
a doubt, that the pronunciation of the Greek language had undergone a 
considerable change. Now it is certainly difficult to suppose that the 
Homeric poems could have suffered by this change, had written copies 
been preserved. If Chaucera__s poetry, for instance, had not been 
written, it could only have come down to us in a softened form, more 
like the effeminate version of Dryden, than the rough, quaint, noble 
original. 
a_oeAt what period,a__ continues Grote, a_oethese poems, or indeed any other 
Greek poems, first began to be written, must be matter of conjecture, 
though there is ground for assurance that it was before the time of 
Solon. If, in the absence of evidence, we may venture upon[pg xx] 
naming any more determinate period, the question a once suggests 
itself, What were the purposes which, in that state of society, a 
manuscript at its first commencement must have been intended to answer? 
For whom was a written Iliad necessary? Not for the rhapsodes; for with 
them it was not only planted in the memory, but also interwoven with 
the feelings, and conceived in conjunction with all those flexions and 
intonations of voice, pauses, and other oral artifices which were 
required for emphatic delivery, and which the naked manuscript could 
never reproduce. Not for the general publica_"they were accustomed to 
receive it with its rhapsodic delivery, and with its accompaniments of 
a solemn and crowded festival. The only persons for whom the written 
Iliad would be suitable would be a select few; studious and curious 
men; a class of readers capable of analyzing the complicated emotions 
which they had experienced as hearers in the crowd, and who would, on 
perusing the written words, realize in their imaginations a sensible 
portion of the impression communicated by the reciter. Incredible as 
the statement may seem in an age like the present, there is in all 
early societies, and there was in early Greece, a time when no such 
reading class existed. If we could discover at what time such a class 
first began to be formed, we should be able to make a guess at the time 
when the old epic poems were first committed to writing. Now the period 
which may with the greatest probability be fixed upon as having first 
witnessed the formation even of the narrowest reading class in Greece, 
is the middle of the seventh century before the Christian aera (B.C. 
660 to B.C. 630), the age of Terpander, Kallinus, Archilochus, 
Simonides of Amorgus, &c. I ground this supposition on the change then 
operated in the character and tendencies of Grecian poetry and 
musica_"the elegiac and the iambic measures having been introduced as 
rivals to the primitive hexameter, and poetical compositions having 
been transferred from the epical past to the affairs of present and 
real life. Such a change was important at a time when poetry was the 
only known mode of publication (to use a modern phrase not altogether 
suitable, yet the nearest approaching to the sense). It argued a new 
way of looking at the old epical treasures of the people as well as a 
thirst for new poetical effect; and the men who stood forward in it, 
may well be considered as desirous to study, and competent to 
criticize, from their own individual point of view, the written words 
of the Homeric rhapsodies, just as we are told that Kallinus both 
noticed and eulogized the Thebais as the production of Homer. There 
seems, therefore, ground for conjecturing that (for the use of this 
newly-formed and important, but very narrow class), manuscripts of the 
Homeric poems and other old epics,a_"the Thebais and the Cypria, as well 
as the Iliad and the Odyssey,a_"began to be compiled towards the middle 
of the seventh century (B.C. 1); and the opening of Egypt to Grecian 
commerce, which took place about the same period, would furnish 
increased facilities for obtaining the requisite papyrus to write upon. 
A reading class, when once formed, would doubtless slowly increase, and 
the number of manuscripts along with it; so that before the time of 
Solon, fifty years afterwards, both readers and manuscripts, though 
still comparatively few, might have attained a[pg xxi] certain 
recognized authority, and formed a tribunal of reference against the 
carelessness of individual rhapsodes.a__26 
But even Peisistratus has not been suffered to remain in possession of 
the credit, and we cannot help feeling the force of the following 
observationsa_" 
a_oeThere are several incidental circumstances which, in our opinion, 
throw some suspicion over the whole history of the Peisistratid 
compilation, at least over the theory, that the Iliad was cast into its 
present stately and harmonious form by the directions of the Athenian 
ruler. If the great poets, who flourished at the bright period of 
Grecian song, of which, alas! we have inherited little more than the 
fame, and the faint echo, if Stesichorus, Anacreon, and Simonides were 
employed in the noble task of compiling the Iliad and Odyssey, so much 
must have been done to arrange, to connect, to harmonize, that it is 
almost incredible, that stronger marks of Athenian manufacture should 
not remain. Whatever occasional anomalies may be detected, anomalies 
which no doubt arise out of our own ignorance of the language of the 
Homeric age, however the irregular use of the digamma may have 
perplexed our Bentleys, to whom the name of Helen is said to have 
caused as much disquiet and distress as the fair one herself among the 
heroes of her age, however Mr. Knight may have failed in reducing the 
Homeric language to its primitive form; however, finally, the Attic 
dialect may not have assumed all its more marked and distinguishing 
characteristicsa_"still it is difficult to suppose that the language, 
particularly in the joinings and transitions, and connecting parts, 
should not more clearly betray the incongruity between the more ancient 
and modern forms of expression. It is not quite in character with such 
a period to imitate an antique style, in order to piece out an 
imperfect poem in the character of the original, as Sir Walter Scott 
has done in his continuation of Sir Tristram. 
a_oeIf, however, not even such faint and indistinct traces of Athenian 
compilation are discoverable in the language of the poems, the total 
absence of Athenian national feeling is perhaps no less worthy of 
observation. In later, and it may fairly be suspected in earlier times, 
the Athenians were more than ordinarily jealous of the fame of their 
ancestors. But, amid all the traditions of the glories of early Greece 
embodied in the Iliad, the Athenians play a most subordinate and 
insignificant part. Even the few passages which relate to their 
ancestors, Mr. Knight suspects to be interpolations. It is possible, 
indeed, that in its leading outline, the Iliad may be true to historic 
fact, that in the great maritime expedition of western Greece against 
the rival and half-kindred empire of the Laomedontiadae, the chieftain 
of Thessaly, from his valour and the number of his forces, may have 
been the most important ally of the Peloponnesian sovereign; the 
preeminent value of the ancient poetry on the Trojan war may thus have 
forced the national feeling of the Athenians to yield to their taste. 
The songs which spoke of their own great ancestor were, no doubt, of 
far inferior sublimity and popularity, or, at first sight, a Theseid 
would have been much more likely to have emanated from an Athenian 
synod of compilers of[pg xxii] ancient song, than an Achilleid or an 
Olysseid. Could France have given birth to a Tasso, Tancred would have 
been the hero of the Jerusalem. If, however, the Homeric ballads, as 
they are sometimes called, which related the wrath of Achilles, with 
all its direful consequences, were so far superior to the rest of the 
poetic cycle, as to admit no rivalry,a_"it is still surprising, that 
throughout the whole poem the callida junctura should never betray the 
workmanship of an Athenian hand, and that the national spirit of a 
race, who have at a later period not inaptly been compared to our self 
admiring neighbours, the French, should submit with lofty self denial 
to the almost total exclusion of their own ancestorsa_"or, at least, to 
the questionable dignity of only having produced a leader tolerably 
skilled in the military tactics of his age.a__27 
To return to the Wolfian theory. While it is to be confessed, that 
Wolfa__s objections to the primitive integrity of the Iliad and Odyssey 
have never been wholly got over, we cannot help discovering that they 
have failed to enlighten us as to any substantial point, and that the 
difficulties with which the whole subject is beset, are rather 
augmented than otherwise, if we admit his hypothesis. Nor is 
Lachmanna__s28 modification of his theory any better. He divides the 
first twenty-two books of the Iliad into sixteen different songs, and 
treats as ridiculous the belief that their amalgamation into one 
regular poem belongs to a period earlier than the age of Peisistratus. 
This, as Grote observes, a_oeexplains the gaps and contradictions in the 
narrative, but it explains nothing else.a__ Moreover, we find no 
contradictions warranting this belief, and the so-called sixteen poets 
concur in getting rid of the following leading men in the first battle 
after the secession of Achilles: Elphenor, chief of the Euboeans; 
Tlepolemus, of the Rhodians; Pandarus, of the Lycians; Odius, of the 
Halizonians; Pirous and Acamas, of the Thracians. None of these heroes 
again make their appearance, and we can but agree with Colonel Mure, 
that a_oeit seems strange that any number of independent poets should have 
so harmoniously dispensed with the services of all six in the sequel.a__ 
The discrepancy, by which Pylaemenes, who is represented as dead in the 
fifth book, weeps at his sona__s funeral in the thirteenth, can only be 
regarded as the result of an interpolation. 
Grote, although not very distinct in stating his own opinions on the 
subject, has done much to clearly show the incongruity of the Wolfian 
theory, and of Lachmanna__s modifications with the character of 
Peisistratus. But he has also shown, and we think with equal success, 
that the two questions relative to the primitive unity of these poems, 
or, supposing that impossible, the unison of these parts by 
Peisistratus, and not before his time, are essentially distinct. In 
short, a_oea man may believe the Iliad to have been put together out of 
pre-existing songs, without recognising the age of Peisistratus as the 
period of its first compilation.a__ The friends or literary _employes_ of 
Peisistratus must have found an Iliad that was already ancient, and the 
silence of the Alexandrine critics respecting the Peisistratic 
a_oerecension,a__ goes far[pg xxiii] to prove, that, among the numerous 
manuscripts they examined, this was either wanting, or thought unworthy 
of attention. 
a_oeMoreover,a__ he continues, a_oethe whole tenor of the poems themselves 
confirms what is here remarked. There is nothing, either in the Iliad 
or Odyssey, which savours of modernism, applying that term to the age 
of Peisistratusa_"nothing which brings to our view the alterations 
brought about by two centuries, in the Greek language, the coined 
money, the habits of writing and reading, the despotisms and republican 
governments, the close military array, the improved construction of 
ships, the Amphiktyonic convocations, the mutual frequentation of 
religious festivals, the Oriental and Egyptian veins of religion, &c., 
familiar to the latter epoch. These alterations Onomakritus, and the 
other literary friends of Peisistratus, could hardly have failed to 
notice, even without design, had they then, for the first time, 
undertaken the task of piecing together many self existent epics into 
one large aggregate. Everything in the two great Homeric poems, both in 
substance and in language, belongs to an age two or three centuries 
earlier than Peisistratus. Indeed, even the interpolations (or those 
passages which, on the best grounds, are pronounced to be such) betray 
no trace of the sixth century before Christ, and may well have been 
heard by Archilochus and Kallinusa_"in some cases even by Arktinus and 
Hesioda_"as genuine Homeric matter29 As far as the evidences on the case, 
as well internal as external, enable us to judge, we seem warranted in 
believing that the Iliad and Odyssey were recited substantially as they 
now stand (always allowing for paitial divergences of text and 
interpolations) in 776 B.C., our first trustworthy mark of Grecian 
time; and this ancient date, let it be added, as it is the 
best-authenticated fact, so it is also the most important attribute of 
the Homeric poems, considered in reference to Grecian history; for they 
thus afford us an insight into the anti-historical character of the 
Greeks, enabling us to trace the subsequent forward march of the 
nation, and to seize instructive contrasts between their former and 
their later condition.a__30 
On the whole, I am inclined to believe, that the labours of 
Peisistratus were wholly of an editorial character, although, I must 
confess, that I can lay down nothing respecting the extent of his 
labours. At the same time, so far from believing that the composition 
or primary arrangement of these poems, in their present form, was the 
work of Peisistratus, I am rather persuaded that the fine taste and 
elegant mind of that Athenian31 would lead him to preserve an ancient 
and traditional order of the poems, rather than to patch and 
re-construct them according to a fanciful hypothesis. I will not repeat 
the many discussions respecting whether the poems were written or not, 
or whether the art of writing was known in the time of their reputed 
author. Suffice it to say, that the more we read, the less satisfied we 
are upon either subject. 
[pg xxiv] I cannot, however, help thinking, that the story which 
attributes the preservation of these poems to Lycurgus, is little else 
than a version of the same story as that of Peisistratus, while its 
historical probability must be measured by that of many others relating 
to the Spartan Confucius. 
I will conclude this sketch of the Homeric theories, with an attempt, 
made by an ingenious friend, to unite them into something like 
consistency. It is as follows:a_" 
a_oeNo doubt the common soldiers of that age had, like the common sailors 
of some fifty years ago, some one qualified to a__discourse in excellent 
musica__ among them. Many of these, like those of the negroes in the 
United States, were extemporaneous, and allusive to events passing 
around them. But what was passing around them? The grand events of a 
spirit-stirring war; occurrences likely to impress themselves, as the 
mystical legends of former times had done, upon their memory; besides 
which, a retentive memory was deemed a virtue of the first water, and 
was cultivated accordingly in those ancient times. Ballads at first, 
and down to the beginning of the war with Troy, were merely 
recitations, with an intonation. Then followed a species of recitative, 
probably with an intoned burden. Tune next followed, as it aided the 
memory considerably. 
a_oeIt was at this period, about four hundred years after the war, that a 
poet flourished of the name of Melesigenes, or Moeonides, but most 
probably the former. He saw that these ballads might be made of great 
utility to his purpose of writing a poem on the social position of 
Hellas, and, as a collection, he published these lays, connecting them 
by a tale of his own. This poem now exists, under the title of the 
a__Odyssea.a__ The author, however, did not affix his own name to the poem, 
which, in fact, was, great part of it, remodelled from the archaic 
dialect of Crete, in which tongue the ballads were found by him. He 
therefore called it the poem of Homeros, or the Collector; but this is 
rather a proof of his modesty and talent, than of his mere drudging 
arrangement of other peoplea__s ideas; for, as Grote has finely observed, 
arguing for the unity of authorship, a__a great poet might have re-cast 
pre-existing separate songs into one comprehensive whole; but no mere 
arrangers or compilers would be competent to do so.a__ 
a_oeWhile employed on the wild legend of Odysseus, he met with a ballad, 
recording the quarrel of Achilles and Agamemnon. His noble mind seized 
the hint that there presented itself, and the Achilleis32 grew under 
his hand. Unity of design, however, caused him to publish the poem 
under the same pseudonyme as his former work: and the disjointed lays 
of the ancient bards were joined together, like those relating to the 
Cid, into a chronicle history, named the Iliad. Melesigenes knew that 
the poem was destined to be a lasting one, and so it has proved; but, 
first, the poems were destined to undergo many vicissitudes and 
corruptions, by the people who took to singing them in the streets, 
assemblies, and agoras. However, Solon first, and then[pg xxv] 
Peisistratus, and afterwards Aristoteles and others, revised the poems, 
and restored the works of Melesigenes Homeros to their original 
integrity in a great measure.a__33 
Having thus given some general notion of the strange theories which 
have developed themselves respecting this most interesting subject, I 
must still express my conviction as to the unity of the authorship of 
the Homeric poems. To deny that many corruptions and interpolations 
disfigure them, and that the intrusive hand of the poetasters may here 
and there have inflicted a wound more serious than the negligence of 
the copyist, would be an absurd and captious assumption, but it is to a 
higher criticism that we must appeal, if we would either understand or 
enjoy these poems. In maintaining the authenticity and personality of 
their one author, be he Homer or Melesigenes, _quocunque nomine vocari 
eum jus fasque sit,_ I feel conscious that, while the whole weight of 
historical evidence is against the hypothesis which would assign these 
great works to a plurality of authors, the most powerful internal 
evidence, and that which springs from the deepest and most immediate 
impulse of the soul, also speaks eloquently to the contrary. 
The minutiae of verbal criticism I am far from seeking to despise. 
Indeed, considering the character of some of my own books, such an 
attempt would be gross inconsistency. But, while I appreciate its 
importance in a philological view, I am inclined to set little store on 
its aesthetic value, especially in poetry. Three parts of the 
emendations made upon poets are mere alterations, some of which, had 
they been suggested to the author by his Maecenas or Africanus, he 
would probably have adopted. Moreover, those who are most exact in 
laying down rules of verbal criticism and interpretation, are often 
least competent to carry out their own precepts. Grammarians are not 
poets by profession, but may be so _per accidens._ I do not at this 
moment remember two emendations on Homer, calculated to substantially 
improve the poetry of a passage, although a mass of remarks, from 
Herodotus down to Loewe, have given us the history of a thousand minute 
points, without which our Greek knowledge would be gloomy and jejune. 
But it is not on words only that grammarians, mere grammarians, will 
exercise their elaborate and often tiresome ingenuity. Binding down an 
heroic or dramatic poet to the block upon which they have previously 
dissected his words and sentences, they proceed to use the axe and the 
pruning knife by wholesale, and inconsistent in everything but their 
wish to make out a case of unlawful affiliation, they cut out book 
after book, passage after passage, till the author is reduced to a 
collection of fragments, or till those, who fancied they possessed the 
works of some great man, find that they have been put off with a vile 
counterfeit got up at second hand. If we compare the theories of 
Knight, Wolf, Lachmann, and others, we shall feel better satisfied of 
the utter uncertainty of criticism than of the apocryphal position of 
Homer. One rejects what another considers the turning-point of his[pg 
xxvi] theory. One cuts a supposed knot by expunging what another would 
explain by omitting something else. 
Nor is this morbid species of sagacity by any means to be looked upon 
as a literary novelty. Justus Lipsius, a scholar of no ordinary skill, 
seems to revel in the imaginary discovery, that the tragedies 
attributed to Seneca are by _four_ different authors.34 Now, I will 
venture to assert, that these tragedies are so uniform, not only in 
their borrowed phraseologya_"a phraseology with which writers like 
Boethius and Saxo Grammaticus were more charmed than ourselvesa_"in their 
freedom from real poetry, and last, but not least, in an ultra-refined 
and consistent abandonment of good taste, that few writers of the 
present day would question the capabilities of the same gentleman, be 
he Seneca or not, to produce not only these, but a great many more 
equally bad. With equal sagacity, Father Hardouin astonished the world 
with the startling announcement that the A_neid of Virgil, and the 
satires of Horace, were literary deceptions. Now, without wishing to 
say one word of disrespect against the industry and learninga_"nay, the 
refined acutenessa_"which scholars, like Wolf, have bestowed upon this 
subject, I must express my fears, that many of our modern Homeric 
theories will become matter for the surprise and entertainment, rather 
than the instruction, of posterity. Nor can I help thinking, that the 
literary history of more recent times will account for many points of 
difficulty in the transmission of the Iliad and Odyssey to a period so 
remote from that of their first creation. 
I have already expressed my belief that the labours of Peisistratus 
were of a purely editorial character; and there seems no more reason 
why corrupt and imperfect editions of Homer may not have been abroad in 
his day, than that the poems of Valerius Flaccus and Tibullus should 
have given so much trouble to Poggio, Scaliger, and others. But, after 
all, the main fault in all the Homeric theories is, that they demand 
too great a sacrifice of those feelings to which poetry most powerfully 
appeals, and which are its most fitting judges. The ingenuity which has 
sought to rob us of the name and existence of Homer, does too much 
violence to that inward emotion, which makes our whole soul yearn with 
love and admiration for the blind bard of Chios. To believe the author 
of the Iliad a mere compiler, is to degrade the powers of human 
invention; to elevate analytical judgment at the expense of the most 
ennobling impulses of the soul; and to forget the ocean in the 
contemplation of a polypus. There is a catholicity, so to speak, in the 
very name of Homer. Our faith in the author of the Iliad may be a 
mistaken one, but as yet nobody has taught us a better. 
While, however, I look upon the belief in Homer as one that has nature 
herself for its mainspring; while I can join with old Ennius in 
believing in Homer as the ghost, who, like some patron saint, hovers 
round the bed of the poet, and even bestows rare gifts from that wealth 
of imagination which a host of imitators could not exhaust,a_"still I am 
far from wishing to deny that the author of these great poems found a 
rich fund of tradition, a well-stocked mythical storehouse from 
whence[pg xxvii] he might derive both subject and embellishment. But it 
is one thing to _use_ existing romances in the embellishment of a poem, 
another to patch up the poem itself from such materials. What 
consistency of style and execution can be hoped for from such an 
attempt? or, rather, what bad taste and tedium will not be the 
infallible result? 
A blending of popular legends, and a free use of the songs of other 
bards, are features perfectly consistent with poetical originality. In 
fact, the most original writer is still drawing upon outward 
impressionsa_"nay, even his own thoughts are a kind of secondary agents 
which support and feed the impulses of imagination. But unless there be 
some grand pervading principlea_"some invisible, yet most distinctly 
stamped archetypus of the great whole, a poem like the Iliad can never 
come to the birth. Traditions the most picturesque, episodes the most 
pathetic, local associations teeming with the thoughts of gods and 
great men, may crowd in one mighty vision, or reveal themselves in more 
substantial forms to the mind of the poet; but, except the power to 
create a grand whole, to which these shall be but as details and 
embellishments, be present, we shall have nought but a scrap-book, a 
parterre filled with flowers and weeds strangling each other in their 
wild redundancy: we shall have a cento of rags and tatters, which will 
require little acuteness to detect. 
Sensible as I am of the difficulty of disproving a negative, and aware 
as I must be of the weighty grounds there are for opposing my belief, 
it still seems to me that the Homeric question is one that is reserved 
for a higher criticism than it has often obtained. We are not by nature 
intended to know all things; still less, to compass the powers by which 
the greatest blessings of life have been placed at our disposal. Were 
faith no virtue, then we might indeed wonder why God willed our 
ignorance on any matter. But we are too well taught the contrary 
lesson; and it seems as though our faith should be especially tried 
touching the men and the events which have wrought most influence upon 
the condition of humanity. And there is a kind of sacredness attached 
to the memory of the great and the good, which seems to bid us repulse 
the scepticism which would allegorize their existence into a pleasing 
apologue, and measure the giants of intellect by an homeopathic 
dynameter. 
Long and habitual reading of Homer appears to familiarize our thoughts 
even to his incongruities; or rather, if we read in a right spirit and 
with a heartfelt appreciation, we are too much dazzled, too deeply 
wrapped in admiration of the whole, to dwell upon the minute spots 
which mere analysis can discover. In reading an heroic poem we must 
transform ourselves into heroes of the time being, we in imagination 
must fight over the same battles, woo the same loves, burn with the 
same sense of injury, as an Achilles or a Hector. And if we can but 
attain this degree of enthusiasm (and less enthusiasm will scarcely 
suffice for the reading of Homer), we shall feel that the poems of 
Homer are not only the work of one writer, but of the greatest writer 
that ever touched the hearts of men by the power of song. 
And it was this supposed unity of authorship which gave these poems 
their powerful influence over the minds of the men of old.[pg xxviii] 
Heeren, who is evidently little disposed in favour of modern theories, 
finely observes:a_" 
a_oeIt was Homer who formed the character of the Greek nation. No poet has 
ever, as a poet, exercised a similar influence over his countrymen. 
Prophets, lawgivers, and sages have formed the character of other 
nations; it was reserved to a poet to form that of the Greeks. This is 
a feature in their character which was not wholly erased even in the 
period of their degeneracy. When lawgivers and sages appeared in 
Greece, the work of the poet had already been accomplished; and they 
paid homage to his superior genius. He held up before his nation the 
mirror, in which they were to behold the world of gods and heroes no 
less than of feeble mortals, and to behold them reflected with purity 
and truth. His poems are founded on the first feeling of human nature; 
on the love of children, wife, and country; on that passion which 
outweighs all others, the love of glory. His songs were poured forth 
from a breast which sympathized with all the feelings of man; and 
therefore they enter, and will continue to enter, every breast which 
cherishes the same sympathies. If it is granted to his immortal spirit, 
from another heaven than any of which he dreamed on earth, to look down 
on his race, to see the nations from the fields of Asia to the forests 
of Hercynia, performing pilgrimages to the fountain which his magic 
wand caused to flow; if it is permitted to him to view the vast 
assemblage of grand, of elevated, of glorious productions, which had 
been called into being by means of his songs; wherever his immortal 
spirit may reside, this alone would suffice to complete his 
happiness.a__35 
Can we contemplate that ancient monument, on which the a_oeApotheosis of 
Homera__36 is depictured, and not feel how much of pleasing association, 
how much that appeals most forcibly and most distinctly to our minds, 
is lost by the admittance of any theory but our old tradition? The more 
we read, and the more we thinka_"think as becomes the readers of 
Homer,a_"the more rooted becomes the conviction that the Father of Poetry 
gave us this rich inheritance, whole and entire. Whatever were the 
means of its preservation, let us rather be thankful for the treasury 
of taste and eloquence thus laid open to our use, than seek to make it 
a mere centre around which to drive a series of theories, whose 
wildness is only equalled by their inconsistency with each other. 
As the hymns, and some other poems usually ascribed to Homer, are not 
included in Popea__s translation, I will content myself with a brief 
account of the Battle of the Frogs and Mice, from the pen of a writer 
who has done it full justice37:a_" 
a_oeThis poem,a__ says Coleridge, a_oeis a short mock-heroic of ancient date. 
The text varies in different editions, and is obviously disturbed and 
corrupt to a great degree; it is commonly said to have been a juvenile 
essay of Homera__s genius; others have attributed it to the same 
Pigrees,[pg xxix]mentioned above, and whose reputation for humour seems 
to have invited the appropriation of any piece of ancient wit, the 
author of which was uncertain; so little did the Greeks, before the age 
of the Ptolemies, know or care about that department of criticism 
employed in determining the genuineness of ancient writings. As to this 
little poem being a youthful prolusion of Homer, it seems sufficient to 
say that from the beginning to the end it is a plain and palpable 
parody, not only of the general spirit, but of the numerous passages of 
the Iliad itself; and even, if no such intention to parody were 
discernible in it, the objection would still remain, that to suppose a 
work of mere burlesque to be the primary effort of poetry in a simple 
age, seems to reverse that order in the development of national taste, 
which the history of every other people in Europe, and of many in Asia, 
has almost ascertained to be a law of the human mind; it is in a state 
of society much more refined and permanent than that described in the 
Iliad, that any popularity would attend such a ridicule of war and the 
gods as is contained in this poem; and the fact of there having existed 
three other poems of the same kind attributed, for aught we can see, 
with as much reason to Homer, is a strong inducement to believe that 
none of them were of the Homeric age. Knight infers from the usage of 
the word deltos, a_oewriting tablet,a__ instead of diphthera, a_oeskin,a__ which, 
according to Herod. 5, 58, was the material employed by the Asiatic 
Greeks for that purpose, that this poem was another offspring of Attic 
ingenuity; and generally that the familiar mention of the cock (v. 191) 
is a strong argument against so ancient a date for its composition.a__ 
Having thus given a brief account of the poems comprised in Popea__s 
design, I will now proceed to make a few remarks on his translation, 
and on my own purpose in the present edition. 
Pope was not a Grecian. His whole education had been irregular, and his 
earliest acquaintance with the poet was through the version of Ogilby. 
It is not too much to say that his whole work bears the impress of a 
disposition to be satisfied with the general sense, rather than to dive 
deeply into the minute and delicate features of language. Hence his 
whole work is to be looked upon rather as an elegant paraphrase than a 
translation. There are, to be sure, certain conventional anecdotes, 
which prove that Pope consulted various friends, whose classical 
attainments were sounder than his own, during the undertaking; but it 
is probable that these examinations were the result rather of the 
contradictory versions already existing, than of a desire to make a 
perfect transcript of the original. And in those days, what is called 
literal translation was less cultivated than at present. If something 
like the general sense could be decorated with the easy gracefulness of 
a practised poet; if the charms of metrical cadence and a pleasing 
fluency could be made consistent with a fair interpretation of the 
poeta__s meaning, his _words_ were less jealously sought for, and those 
who could read so good a poem as Popea__s Iliad had fair reason to be 
satisfied. 
It would be absurd, therefore, to test Popea__s translation by our own 
advancing knowledge of the original text. We must be content to[pg xxx] 
look at it as a most delightful work in itself,a_"a work which is as much 
a part of English literature as Homer himself is of Greek. We must not 
be torn from our kindly associations with the old Iliad, that once was 
our most cherished companion, or our most looked-for prize, merely 
because Buttmann, Loewe, and Liddell have made us so much more accurate 
as to amphikupellon being an adjective, and not a substantive. Far be 
it from us to defend the faults of Pope, especially when we think of 
Chapmana__s fine, bold, rough old English;a_"far be it from, us to hold up 
his translation as what a translation of Homer _might_ be. But we can 
still dismiss Popea__s Iliad to the hands of our readers, with the 
consciousness that they must have read a very great number of books 
before they have read its fellow. 
As to the Notes accompanying the present volume, they are drawn up 
without pretension, and mainly with the view of helping the general 
reader. Having some little time since translated all the works of Homer 
for another publisher, I might have brought a large amount of 
accumulated matter, sometimes of a critical character, to bear upon the 
text. But Popea__s version was no field for such a display; and my 
purpose was to touch briefly on antiquarian or mythological allusions, 
to notice occasionally _some_ departures from the original, and to give 
a few parallel passages from our English Homer, Milton. In the latter 
task I cannot pretend to novelty, but I trust that my other 
annotations, while utterly disclaiming high scholastic views, will be 
found to convey as much as is wanted; at least, as far as the necessary 
limits of these volumes could be expected to admit. To write a 
commentary on Homer is not my present aim; but if I have made Popea__s 
translation a little more entertaining and instructive to a mass of 
miscellaneous readers, I shall consider my wishes satisfactorily 
accomplished. 
THEODORE ALOIS BUCKLEY. 
_Christ Church._ 
[pg xxxi] 
POPEa__S PREFACE TO THE ILIAD OF HOMER 
Homer is universally allowed to have had the greatest invention of any 
writer whatever. The praise of judgment Virgil has justly contested 
with him, and others may have their pretensions as to particular 
excellences; but his invention remains yet unrivalled. Nor is it a 
wonder if he has ever been acknowledged the greatest of poets, who most 
excelled in that which is the very foundation of poetry. It is the 
invention that, in different degrees, distinguishes all great geniuses: 
the utmost stretch of human study, learning, and industry, which 
masters everything besides, can never attain to this. It furnishes art 
with all her materials, and without it judgment itself can at best but 
a_oesteal wisely:a__ for art is only like a prudent steward that lives on 
managing the riches of nature. Whatever praises may be given to works 
of judgment, there is not even a single beauty in them to which the 
invention must not contribute: as in the most regular gardens, art can 
only reduce beauties of nature to more regularity, and such a figure, 
which the common eye may better take in, and is, therefore, more 
entertained with. And, perhaps, the reason why common critics are 
inclined to prefer a judicious and methodical genius to a great and 
fruitful one, is, because they find it easier for themselves to pursue 
their observations through a uniform and bounded walk of art, than to 
comprehend the vast and various extent of nature. 
Our authora__s work is a wild paradise, where, if we cannot see all the 
beauties so distinctly as in an ordered garden, it is only because the 
number of them is infinitely greater. It is like a copious nursery, 
which contains the seeds and first productions of every kind, out of 
which those who followed him have but selected some particular plants, 
each according to his fancy, to cultivate and beautify. If some things 
are too luxuriant it is owing to the richness of the soil; and if 
others are not arrived to perfection or maturity, it is only because 
they are overrun and oppressed by those of a stronger nature. 
It is to the strength of this amazing invention we are to attribute 
that unequalled fire and rapture which is so forcible in Homer, that no 
man of a true poetical spirit is master of himself while he reads him. 
What he writes is of the most animated nature imaginable; every thing 
moves, every thing lives, and is put in action. If a council be called, 
or a battle fought, you are not coldly informed of what was said[pg 
xxxii] or done as from a third person; the reader is hurried out of 
himself by the force of the poeta__s imagination, and turns in one place 
to a hearer, in another to a spectator. The course of his verses 
resembles that of the army he describes, 
Hoida__ ara__ isan hosei te puri chthon pasa nemoito. a_oeThey pour along like 
a fire that sweeps the whole earth before it.a__ It is, however, 
remarkable, that his fancy, which is everywhere vigorous, is not 
discovered immediately at the beginning of his poem in its fullest 
splendour: it grows in the progress both upon himself and others, and 
becomes on fire, like a chariot-wheel, by its own rapidity. Exact 
disposition, just thought, correct elocution, polished numbers, may 
have been found in a thousand; but this poetic fire, this a_oevivida vis 
animi,a__ in a very few. Even in works where all those are imperfect or 
neglected, this can overpower criticism, and make us admire even while 
we disapprove. Nay, where this appears, though attended with 
absurdities, it brightens all the rubbish about it, till we see nothing 
but its own splendour. This fire is discerned in Virgil, but discerned 
as through a glass, reflected from Homer, more shining than fierce, but 
everywhere equal and constant: in Lucan and Statius it bursts out in 
sudden, short, and interrupted flashes: In Milton it glows like a 
furnace kept up to an uncommon ardour by the force of art: in 
Shakspeare it strikes before we are aware, like an accidental fire from 
heaven: but in Homer, and in him only, it burns everywhere clearly and 
everywhere irresistibly. 
I shall here endeavour to show how this vast invention exerts itself in 
a manner superior to that of any poet through all the main constituent 
parts of his work: as it is the great and peculiar characteristic which 
distinguishes him from all other authors. 
This strong and ruling faculty was like a powerful star, which, in the 
violence of its course, drew all things within its vortex. It seemed 
not enough to have taken in the whole circle of arts, and the whole 
compass of nature, to supply his maxims and reflections; all the inward 
passions and affections of mankind, to furnish his characters: and all 
the outward forms and images of things for his descriptions: but 
wanting yet an ampler sphere to expatiate in, he opened a new and 
boundless walk for his imagination, and created a world for himself in 
the invention of fable. That which Aristotle calls a_oethe soul of 
poetry,a__ was first breathed into it by Homer, I shall begin with 
considering him in his part, as it is naturally the first; and I speak 
of it both as it means the design of a poem, and as it is taken for 
fiction. 
Fable may be divided into the probable, the allegorical, and the 
marvellous. The probable fable is the recital of such actions as, 
though they did not happen, yet might, in the common course of nature; 
or of such as, though they did, became fables by the additional 
episodes and manner of telling them. Of this sort is the main story of 
an epic poem, a_oeThe return of Ulysses, the settlement of the Trojans in 
Italy,a__ or the like. That of the Iliad is the a_oeanger of Achilles,a__ the 
most short and single subject that ever was chosen by any poet. Yet 
this he has supplied with a vaster variety of incidents[pg xxxiii] and 
events, and crowded with a greater number of councils, speeches, 
battles, and episodes of all kinds, than are to be found even in those 
poems whose schemes are of the utmost latitude and irregularity. The 
action is hurried on with the most vehement spirit, and its whole 
duration employs not so much as fifty days. Virgil, for want of so warm 
a genius, aided himself by taking in a more extensive subject, as well 
as a greater length of time, and contracting the design of both Homera__s 
poems into one, which is yet but a fourth part as large as his. The 
other epic poets have used the same practice, but generally carried it 
so far as to superinduce a multiplicity of fables, destroy the unity of 
action, and lose their readers in an unreasonable length of time. Nor 
is it only in the main design that they have been unable to add to his 
invention, but they have followed him in every episode and part of 
story. If he has given a regular catalogue of an army, they all draw up 
their forces in the same order. If he has funeral games for Patroclus, 
Virgil has the same for Anchises, and Statius (rather than omit them) 
destroys the unity of his actions for those of Archemorus. If Ulysses 
visit the shades, the A_neas of Virgil and Scipio of Silius are sent 
after him. If he be detained from his return by the allurements of 
Calypso, so is A_neas by Dido, and Rinaldo by Armida. If Achilles be 
absent from the army on the score of a quarrel through half the poem, 
Rinaldo must absent himself just as long on the like account. If he 
gives his hero a suit of celestial armour, Virgil and Tasso make the 
same present to theirs. Virgil has not only observed this close 
imitation of Homer, but, where he had not led the way, supplied the 
want from other Greek authors. Thus the story of Sinon, and the taking 
of Troy, was copied (says Macrobius) almost word for word from 
Pisander, as the loves of Dido and A_neas are taken from those of Medea 
and Jason in Apollonius, and several others in the same manner. 
To proceed to the allegorical fablea_"If we reflect upon those 
innumerable knowledges, those secrets of nature and physical philosophy 
which Homer is generally supposed to have wrapped up in his allegories, 
what a new and ample scene of wonder may this consideration afford us! 
How fertile will that imagination appear, which as able to clothe all 
the properties of elements, the qualifications of the mind, the virtues 
and vices, in forms and persons, and to introduce them into actions 
agreeable to the nature of the things they shadowed! This is a field in 
which no succeeding poets could dispute with Homer, and whatever 
commendations have been allowed them on this head, are by no means for 
their invention in having enlarged his circle, but for their judgment 
in having contracted it. For when the mode of learning changed in the 
following ages, and science was delivered in a plainer manner, it then 
became as reasonable in the more modern poets to lay it aside, as it 
was in Homer to make use of it. And perhaps it was no unhappy 
circumstance for Virgil, that there was not in his time that demand 
upon him of so great an invention as might be capable of furnishing all 
those allegorical parts of a poem. 
The marvellous fable includes whatever is supernatural, and especially 
the machines of the gods. If Homer was not the first who introduced the 
deities (as Herodotus imagines) into the religion of[pg xxxiv] Greece, 
he seems the first who brought them into a system of machinery for 
poetry, and such a one as makes its greatest importance and dignity: 
for we find those authors who have been offended at the literal notion 
of the gods, constantly laying their accusation against Homer as the 
chief support of it. But whatever cause there might be to blame his 
machines in a philosophical or religious view, they are so perfect in 
the poetic, that mankind have been ever since contented to follow them: 
none have been able to enlarge the sphere of poetry beyond the limits 
he has set: every attempt of this nature has proved unsuccessful; and 
after all the various changes of times and religions, his gods continue 
to this day the gods of poetry. 
We come now to the characters of his persons; and here we shall find no 
author has ever drawn so many, with so visible and surprising a 
variety, or given us such lively and affecting impressions of them. 
Every one has something so singularly his own, that no painter could 
have distinguished them more by their features, than the poet has by 
their manners. Nothing can be more exact than the distinctions he has 
observed in the different degrees of virtues and vices. The single 
quality of courage is wonderfully diversified in the several characters 
of the Iliad. That of Achilles is furious and intractable; that of 
Diomede forward, yet listening to advice, and subject to command; that 
of Ajax is heavy and self-confiding; of Hector, active and vigilant: 
the courage of Agamemnon is inspirited by love of empire and ambition; 
that of Menelaus mixed with softness and tenderness for his people: we 
find in Idomeneus a plain direct soldier; in Sarpedon a gallant and 
generous one. Nor is this judicious and astonishing diversity to be 
found only in the principal quality which constitutes the main of each 
character, but even in the under parts of it, to which he takes care to 
give a tincture of that principal one. For example: the main characters 
of Ulysses and Nestor consist in wisdom; and they are distinct in this, 
that the wisdom of one is artificial and various, of the other natural, 
open, and regular. But they have, besides, characters of courage; and 
this quality also takes a different turn in each from the difference of 
his prudence; for one in the war depends still upon caution, the other 
upon experience. It would be endless to produce instances of these 
kinds. The characters of Virgil are far from striking us in this open 
manner; they lie, in a great degree, hidden and undistinguished; and, 
where they are marked most evidently affect us not in proportion to 
those of Homer. His characters of valour are much alike; even that of 
Turnus seems no way peculiar, but, as it is, in a superior degree; and 
we see nothing that differences the courage of Mnestheus from that of 
Sergestus, Cloanthus, or the rest, In like manner it may be remarked of 
Statiusa__s heroes, that an air of impetuosity runs through them all; the 
same horrid and savage courage appears in his Capaneus, Tydeus, 
Hippomedon, &c. They have a parity of character, which makes them seem 
brothers of one family. I believe when the reader is led into this 
tract of reflection, if he will pursue it through the epic and tragic 
writers, he will be convinced how infinitely superior, in this point, 
the invention of Homer was to that of all others. 
[pg xxxv] The speeches are to be considered as they flow from the 
characters; being perfect or defective as they agree or disagree with 
the manners, of those who utter them. As there is more variety of 
characters in the Iliad, so there is of speeches, than in any other 
poem. a_oeEverything in it has mannera__ (as Aristotle expresses it), that 
is, everything is acted or spoken. It is hardly credible, in a work of 
such length, how small a number of lines are employed in narration. In 
Virgil the dramatic part is less in proportion to the narrative, and 
the speeches often consist of general reflections or thoughts, which 
might be equally just in any persona__s mouth upon the same occasion. As 
many of his persons have no apparent characters, so many of his 
speeches escape being applied and judged by the rule of propriety. We 
oftener think of the author himself when we read Virgil, than when we 
are engaged in Homer, all which are the effects of a colder invention, 
that interests us less in the action described. Homer makes us hearers, 
and Virgil leaves us readers. 
If, in the next place, we take a view of the sentiments, the same 
presiding faculty is eminent in the sublimity and spirit of his 
thoughts. Longinus has given his opinion, that it was in this part 
Homer principally excelled. What were alone sufficient to prove the 
grandeur and excellence of his sentiments in general, is, that they 
have so remarkable a parity with those of the Scripture. Duport, in his 
Gnomologia Homerica, has collected innumerable instances of this sort. 
And it is with justice an excellent modern writer allows, that if 
Virgil has not so many thoughts that are low and vulgar, he has not so 
many that are sublime and noble; and that the Roman author seldom rises 
into very astonishing sentiments where he is not fired by the Iliad. 
If we observe his descriptions, images, and similes, we shall find the 
invention still predominant. To what else can we ascribe that vast 
comprehension of images of every sort, where we see each circumstance 
of art, and individual of nature, summoned together by the extent and 
fecundity of his imagination to which all things, in their various 
views presented themselves in an instant, and had their impressions 
taken off to perfection at a heat? Nay, he not only gives us the full 
prospects of things, but several unexpected peculiarities and side 
views, unobserved by any painter but Homer. Nothing is so surprising as 
the descriptions of his battles, which take up no less than half the 
Iliad, and are supplied with so vast a variety of incidents, that no 
one bears a likeness to another; such different kinds of deaths, that 
no two heroes are wounded in the same manner, and such a profusion of 
noble ideas, that every battle rises above the last in greatness, 
horror, and confusion. It is certain there is not near that number of 
images and descriptions in any epic poet, though every one has assisted 
himself with a great quantity out of him; and it is evident of Virgil 
especially, that he has scarce any comparisons which are not drawn from 
his master. 
If we descend from hence to the expression, we see the bright 
imagination of Homer shining out in the most enlivened forms of it. We 
acknowledge him the father of poetical diction; the first who taught 
that a_oelanguage of the godsa__ to men. His expression is like[pg xxxvi] 
the colouring of some great masters, which discovers itself to be laid 
on boldly, and executed with rapidity. It is, indeed, the strongest and 
most glowing imaginable, and touched with the greatest spirit. 
Aristotle had reason to say, he was the only poet who had found out 
a_oeliving words;a__ there are in him more daring figures and metaphors than 
in any good author whatever. An arrow is a_oeimpatienta__ to be on the wing, 
a weapon a_oethirstsa__ to drink the blood of an enemy, and the like, yet 
his expression is never too big for the sense, but justly great in 
proportion to it. It is the sentiment that swells and fills out the 
diction, which rises with it, and forms itself about it, for in the 
same degree that a thought is warmer, an expression will be brighter, 
as that is more strong, this will become more perspicuous; like glass 
in the furnace, which grows to a greater magnitude, and refines to a 
greater clearness, only as the breath within is more powerful, and the 
heat more intense. 
To throw his language more out of prose, Homer seems to have affected 
the compound epithets. This was a sort of composition peculiarly proper 
to poetry, not only as it heightened the diction, but as it assisted 
and filled the numbers with greater sound and pomp, and likewise 
conduced in some measure to thicken the images. On this last 
consideration I cannot but attribute these also to the fruitfulness of 
his invention, since (as he has managed them) they are a sort of 
supernumerary pictures of the persons or things to which they were 
joined. We see the motion of Hectora__s plumes in the epithet 
Korythaiolos, the landscape of Mount Neritus in that of Einosiphyllos, 
and so of others, which particular images could not have been insisted 
upon so long as to express them in a description (though but of a 
single line) without diverting the reader too much from the principal 
action or figure. As a metaphor is a short simile, one of these 
epithets is a short description. 
Lastly, if we consider his versification, we shall be sensible what a 
share of praise is due to his invention in that also. He was not 
satisfied with his language as he found it settled in any one part of 
Greece, but searched through its different dialects with this 
particular view, to beautify and perfect his numbers he considered 
these as they had a greater mixture of vowels or consonants, and 
accordingly employed them as the verse required either a greater 
smoothness or strength. What he most affected was the Ionic, which has 
a peculiar sweetness, from its never using contractions, and from its 
custom of resolving the diphthongs into two syllables, so as to make 
the words open themselves with a more spreading and sonorous fluency. 
With this he mingled the Attic contractions, the broader Doric, and the 
feebler A_olic, which often rejects its aspirate, or takes off its 
accent, and completed this variety by altering some letters with the 
licence of poetry. Thus his measures, instead of being fetters to his 
sense, were always in readiness to run along with the warmth of his 
rapture, and even to give a further representation of his notions, in 
the correspondence of their sounds to what they signified. Out of all 
these he has derived that harmony which makes us confess he had not 
only the richest head, but the finest ear in the world. This is so 
great a truth, that whoever will but[pg xxxvii] consult the tune of his 
verses, even without understanding them (with the same sort of 
diligence as we daily see practised in the case of Italian operas), 
will find more sweetness, variety, and majesty of sound, than in any 
other language of poetry. The beauty of his numbers is allowed by the 
critics to be copied but faintly by Virgil himself, though they are so 
just as to ascribe it to the nature of the Latin tongue: indeed the 
Greek has some advantages both from the natural sound of its words, and 
the turn and cadence of its verse, which agree with the genius of no 
other language. Virgil was very sensible of this, and used the utmost 
diligence in working up a more intractable language to whatsoever 
graces it was capable of, and, in particular, never failed to bring the 
sound of his line to a beautiful agreement with its sense. If the 
Grecian poet has not been so frequently celebrated on this account as 
the Roman, the only reason is, that fewer critics have understood one 
language than the other. Dionysius of Halicarnassus has pointed out 
many of our authora__s beauties in this kind, in his treatise of the 
Composition of Words. It suffices at present to observe of his numbers, 
that they flow with so much ease, as to make one imagine Homer had no 
other care than to transcribe as fast as the Muses dictated, and, at 
the same time, with so much force and inspiriting vigour, that they 
awaken and raise us like the sound of a trumpet. They roll along as a 
plentiful river, always in motion, and always full; while we are borne 
away by a tide of verse, the most rapid, and yet the most smooth 
imaginable. 
Thus on whatever side we contemplate Homer, what principally strikes us 
is his invention. It is that which forms the character of each part of 
his work; and accordingly we find it to have made his fable more 
extensive and copious than any other, his manners more lively and 
strongly marked, his speeches more affecting and transported, his 
sentiments more warm and sublime, his images and descriptions more full 
and animated, his expression more raised and daring, and his numbers 
more rapid and various. I hope, in what has been said of Virgil, with 
regard to any of these heads, I have no way derogated from his 
character. Nothing is more absurd or endless, than the common method of 
comparing eminent writers by an opposition of particular passages in 
them, and forming a judgment from thence of their merit upon the whole. 
We ought to have a certain knowledge of the principal character and 
distinguishing excellence of each: it is in that we are to consider 
him, and in proportion to his degree in that we are to admire him. No 
author or man ever excelled all the world in more than one faculty; and 
as Homer has done this in invention, Virgil has in judgment. Not that 
we are to think that Homer wanted judgment, because Virgil had it in a 
more eminent degree; or that Virgil wanted invention, because Homer 
possessed a larger share of it; each of these great authors had more of 
both than perhaps any man besides, and are only said to have less in 
comparison with one another. Homer was the greater genius, Virgil the 
better artist. In one we most admire the man, in the other the work. 
Homer hurries and transports us with a commanding impetuosity; Virgil 
leads us with an attractive majesty; Homer scatters with a generous 
profusion;[pg xxxviii] Virgil bestows with a careful magnificence; 
Homer, like the Nile, pours out his riches with a boundless overflow; 
Virgil, like a river in its banks, with a gentle and constant stream. 
When we behold their battles, methinks the two poets resemble the 
heroes they celebrate. Homer, boundless and resistless as Achilles, 
bears all before him, and shines more and more as the tumult increases; 
Virgil, calmly daring, like A_neas, appears undisturbed in the midst of 
the action; disposes all about him, and conquers with tranquillity. And 
when we look upon their machines, Homer seems like his own Jupiter in 
his terrors, shaking Olympus, scattering the lightnings, and firing the 
heavens: Virgil, like the same power in his benevolence, counselling 
with the gods, laying plans for empires, and regularly ordering his 
whole creation. 
But after all, it is with great parts, as with great virtues, they 
naturally border on some imperfection; and it is often hard to 
distinguish exactly where the virtue ends, or the fault begins. As 
prudence may sometimes sink to suspicion, so may a great judgment 
decline to coldness; and as magnanimity may run up to profusion or 
extravagance, so may a great invention to redundancy or wildness. If we 
look upon Homer in this view, we shall perceive the chief objections 
against him to proceed from so noble a cause as the excess of this 
faculty. 
Among these we may reckon some of his marvellous fictions, upon which 
so much criticism has been spent, as surpassing all the bounds of 
probability. Perhaps it may be with great and superior souls, as with 
gigantic bodies, which, exerting themselves with unusual strength, 
exceed what is commonly thought the due proportion of parts, to become 
miracles in the whole; and, like the old heroes of that make, commit 
something near extravagance, amidst a series of glorious and inimitable 
performances. Thus Homer has his a_oespeaking horses;a__ and Virgil his 
a_oemyrtles distilling blood;a__ where the latter has not so much as 
contrived the easy intervention of a deity to save the probability. 
It is owing to the same vast invention, that his similes have been 
thought too exuberant and full of circumstances. The force of this 
faculty is seen in nothing more, than in its inability to confine 
itself to that single circumstance upon which the comparison is 
grounded: it runs out into embellishments of additional images, which, 
however, are so managed as not to overpower the main one. His similes 
are like pictures, where the principal figure has not only its 
proportion given agreeable to the original, but is also set off with 
occasional ornaments and prospects. The same will account for his 
manner of heaping a number of comparisons together in one breath, when 
his fancy suggested to him at once so many various and correspondent 
images. The reader will easily extend this observation to more 
objections of the same kind. 
If there are others which seem rather to charge him with a defect or 
narrowness of genius, than an excess of it, those seeming defects will 
be found upon examination to proceed wholly from the nature of the 
times he lived in. Such are his grosser representations of the gods; 
and the vicious and imperfect manners of his heroes; but I must here[pg 
xxxix] speak a word of the latter, as it is a point generally carried 
into extremes, both by the censurers and defenders of Homer. It must be 
a strange partiality to antiquity, to think with Madame Dacier,38 a_oethat 
those times and manners are so much the more excellent, as they are 
more contrary to ours.a__ Who can be so prejudiced in their favour as to 
magnify the felicity of those ages, when a spirit of revenge and 
cruelty, joined with the practice of rapine and robbery, reigned 
through the world: when no mercy was shown but for the sake of lucre; 
when the greatest princes were put to the sword, and their wives and 
daughters made slaves and concubines? On the other side, I would not be 
so delicate as those modern critics, who are shocked at the servile 
offices and mean employments in which we sometimes see the heroes of 
Homer engaged. There is a pleasure in taking a view of that simplicity, 
in opposition to the luxury of succeeding ages: in beholding monarchs 
without their guards; princes tending their flocks, and princesses 
drawing water from the springs. When we read Homer, we ought to reflect 
that we are reading the most ancient author in the heathen world; and 
those who consider him in this light, will double their pleasure in the 
perusal of him. Let them think they are growing acquainted with nations 
and people that are now no more; that they are stepping almost three 
thousand years back into the remotest antiquity, and entertaining 
themselves with a clear and surprising vision of things nowhere else to 
be found, the only true mirror of that ancient world. By this means 
alone their greatest obstacles will vanish; and what usually creates 
their dislike, will become a satisfaction. 
This consideration may further serve to answer for the constant use of 
the same epithets to his gods and heroes; such as the a_oefar-darting 
Phoebus,a__ the a_oeblue-eyed Pallas,a__ the a_oeswift-footed Achilles,a__ &c., 
which some have censured as impertinent, and tediously repeated. Those 
of the gods depended upon the powers and offices then believed to 
belong to them; and had contracted a weight and veneration from the 
rites and solemn devotions in which they were used: they were a sort of 
attributes with which it was a matter of religion to salute them on all 
occasions, and which it was an irreverence to omit. As for the epithets 
of great men, Mons. Boileau is of opinion, that they were in the nature 
of surnames, and repeated as such; for the Greeks having no names 
derived from their fathers, were obliged to add some other distinction 
of each person; either naming his parents expressly, or his place of 
birth, profession, or the like: as Alexander the son of Philip, 
Herodotus of Halicarnassus, Diogenes the Cynic, &c. Homer, therefore, 
complying with the custom of his country, used such distinctive 
additions as better agreed with poetry. And, indeed, we have something 
parallel to these in modern times, such as the names of Harold 
Harefoot, Edmund Ironside, Edward Longshanks, Edward the Black Prince, 
&c. If yet this be thought to account better for the propriety than for 
the repetition, I shall add a further conjecture. Hesiod, dividing the 
world into its different ages, has placed a fourth age, between the 
brazen and the iron one, of a_oeheroes distinct from other[pg xl] men; a 
divine race who fought at Thebes and Troy, are called demi-gods, and 
live by the care of Jupiter in the islands of the blessed.a__ Now among 
the divine honours which were paid them, they might have this also in 
common with the gods, not to be mentioned without the solemnity of an 
epithet, and such as might be acceptable to them by celebrating their 
families, actions or qualities. 
What other cavils have been raised against Homer, are such as hardly 
deserve a reply, but will yet be taken notice of as they occur in the 
course of the work. Many have been occasioned by an injudicious 
endeavour to exalt Virgil; which is much the same, as if one should 
think to raise the superstructure by undermining the foundation: one 
would imagine, by the whole course of their parallels, that these 
critics never so much as heard of Homera__s having written first; a 
consideration which whoever compares these two poets ought to have 
always in his eye. Some accuse him for the same things which they 
overlook or praise in the other; as when they prefer the fable and 
moral of the A_neis to those of the Iliad, for the same reasons which 
might set the Odyssey above the A_neis; as that the hero is a wiser man, 
and the action of the one more beneficial to his country than that of 
the other; or else they blame him for not doing what he never designed; 
as because Achilles is not as good and perfect a prince as A_neas, when 
the very moral of his poem required a contrary character: it is thus 
that Rapin judges in his comparison of Homer and Virgil. Others select 
those particular passages of Homer which are not so laboured as some 
that Virgil drew out of them: this is the whole management of Scaliger 
in his Poetics. Others quarrel with what they take for low and mean 
expressions, sometimes through a false delicacy and refinement, oftener 
from an ignorance of the graces of the original, and then triumph in 
the awkwardness of their own translations: this is the conduct of 
Perrault in his Parallels. Lastly, there are others, who, pretending to 
a fairer proceeding, distinguish between the personal merit of Homer, 
and that of his work; but when they come to assign the causes of the 
great reputation of the Iliad, they found it upon the ignorance of his 
times, and the prejudice of those that followed: and in pursuance of 
this principle, they make those accidents (such as the contention of 
the cities, &c.) to be the causes of his fame, which were in reality 
the consequences of his merit. The same might as well be said of 
Virgil, or any great author whose general character will infallibly 
raise many casual additions to their reputation. This is the method of 
Mons. de la Mott; who yet confesses upon the whole that in whatever age 
Homer had lived, he must have been the greatest poet of his nation, and 
that he may be said in his sense to be the master even of those who 
surpassed him.39 
In all these objections we see nothing that contradicts his title to 
the honour of the chief invention: and as long as this (which is indeed 
the characteristic of poetry itself) remains unequalled by his 
followers, he still continues superior to them. A cooler judgment may 
commit fewer faults, and be more approved in the eyes of one sort of 
critics: but that warmth of fancy will carry the loudest and most[pg 
xli] universal applauses which holds the heart of a reader under the 
strongest enchantment. Homer not only appears the inventor of poetry, 
but excels all the inventors of other arts, in this, that he has 
swallowed up the honour of those who succeeded him. What he has done 
admitted no increase, it only left room for contraction or regulation. 
He showed all the stretch of fancy at once; and if he has failed in 
some of his flights, it was but because he attempted everything. A work 
of this kind seems like a mighty tree, which rises from the most 
vigorous seed, is improved with industry, flourishes, and produces the 
finest fruit: nature and art conspire to raise it; pleasure and profit 
join to make it valuable: and they who find the justest faults, have 
only said that a few branches which run luxuriant through a richness of 
nature, might be lopped into form to give it a more regular appearance. 
Having now spoken of the beauties and defects of the original, it 
remains to treat of the translation, with the same view to the chief 
characteristic. As far as that is seen in the main parts of the poem, 
such as the fable, manners, and sentiments, no translator can prejudice 
it but by wilful omissions or contractions. As it also breaks out in 
every particular image, description, and simile, whoever lessens or too 
much softens those, takes off from this chief character. It is the 
first grand duty of an interpreter to give his author entire and 
unmaimed; and for the rest, the diction and versification only are his 
proper province, since these must be his own, but the others he is to 
take as he finds them. 
It should then be considered what methods may afford some equivalent in 
our language for the graces of these in the Greek. It is certain no 
literal translation can be just to an excellent original in a superior 
language: but it is a great mistake to imagine (as many have done) that 
a rash paraphrase can make amends for this general defect; which is no 
less in danger to lose the spirit of an ancient, by deviating into the 
modern manners of expression. If there be sometimes a darkness, there 
is often a light in antiquity, which nothing better preserves than a 
version almost literal. I know no liberties one ought to take, but 
those which are necessary to transfusing the spirit of the original, 
and supporting the poetical style of the translation: and I will 
venture to say, there have not been more men misled in former times by 
a servile, dull adherence to the letter, than have been deluded in ours 
by a chimerical, insolent hope of raising and improving their author. 
It is not to be doubted, that the fire of the poem is what a translator 
should principally regard, as it is most likely to expire in his 
managing: however, it is his safest way to be content with preserving 
this to his utmost in the whole, without endeavouring to be more than 
he finds his author is, in any particular place. It is a great secret 
in writing, to know when to be plain, and when poetical and figurative; 
and it is what Homer will teach us, if we will but follow modestly in 
his footsteps. Where his diction is bold and lofty, let us raise ours 
as high as we can; but where his is plain and humble, we ought not to 
be deterred from imitating him by the fear of incurring the censure of 
a mere English critic. Nothing that belongs to Homer[pg xlii] seems to 
have been more commonly mistaken than the just pitch of his style: some 
of his translators having swelled into fustian in a proud confidence of 
the sublime; others sunk into flatness, in a cold and timorous notion 
of simplicity. Methinks I see these different followers of Homer, some 
sweating and straining after him by violent leaps and bounds (the 
certain signs of false mettle), others slowly and servilely creeping in 
his train, while the poet himself is all the time proceeding with an 
unaffected and equal majesty before them. However, of the two extremes 
one could sooner pardon frenzy than frigidity; no author is to be 
envied for such commendations, as he may gain by that character of 
style, which his friends must agree together to call simplicity, and 
the rest of the world will call dulness. There is a graceful and 
dignified simplicity, as well as a bold and sordid one; which differ as 
much from each other as the air of a plain man from that of a sloven: 
it is one thing to be tricked up, and another not to be dressed at all. 
Simplicity is the mean between ostentation and rusticity. 
This pure and noble simplicity is nowhere in such perfection as in the 
Scripture and our author. One may affirm, with all respect to the 
inspired writings, that the Divine Spirit made use of no other words 
but what were intelligible and common to men at that time, and in that 
part of the world; and, as Homer is the author nearest to those, his 
style must of course bear a greater resemblance to the sacred books 
than that of any other writer. This consideration (together with what 
has been observed of the parity of some of his thoughts) may, methinks, 
induce a translator, on the one hand, to give in to several of those 
general phrases and manners of expression, which have attained a 
veneration even in our language from being used in the Old Testament; 
as, on the other, to avoid those which have been appropriated to the 
Divinity, and in a manner consigned to mystery and religion. 
For a further preservation of this air of simplicity, a particular care 
should be taken to express with all plainness those moral sentences and 
proverbial speeches which are so numerous in this poet. They have 
something venerable, and as I may say, oracular, in that unadorned 
gravity and shortness with which they are delivered: a grace which 
would be utterly lost by endeavouring to give them what we call a more 
ingenious (that is, a more modern) turn in the paraphrase. 
Perhaps the mixture of some Graecisms and old words after the manner of 
Milton, if done without too much affectation, might not have an ill 
effect in a version of this particular work, which most of any other 
seems to require a venerable, antique cast. But certainly the use of 
modern terms of war and government, such as a_oeplatoon, campaign, junto,a__ 
or the like, (into which some of his translators have fallen) cannot be 
allowable; those only excepted without which it is impossible to treat 
the subjects in any living language. 
There are two peculiarities in Homera__s diction, which are a sort of 
marks or moles by which every common eye distinguishes him at first 
sight; those who are not his greatest admirers look upon them as 
defects, and those who are, seemed pleased with them as beauties. I 
speak of his compound epithets, and of his repetitions. Many of the[pg 
xliii] former cannot be done literally into English without destroying 
the purity of our language. I believe such should be retained as slide 
easily of themselves into an English compound, without violence to the 
ear or to the received rules of composition, as well as those which 
have received a sanction from the authority of our best poets, and are 
become familiar through their use of them; such as a_oethe 
cloud-compelling Jove,a__ &c. As for the rest, whenever any can be as 
fully and significantly expressed in a single word as in a compounded 
one, the course to be taken is obvious. 
Some that cannot be so turned, as to preserve their full image by one 
or two words, may have justice done them by circumlocution; as the 
epithet einosiphyllos to a mountain, would appear little or ridiculous 
translated literally a_oeleaf-shaking,a__ but affords a majestic idea in the 
periphrasis: a_oethe lofty mountain shakes his waving woods.a__ Others that 
admit of different significations, may receive an advantage from a 
judicious variation, according to the occasions on which they are 
introduced. For example, the epithet of Apollo, hekaebolos or 
a_oefar-shooting,a__ is capable of two explications; one literal, in respect 
of the darts and bow, the ensigns of that god; the other allegorical, 
with regard to the rays of the sun; therefore, in such places where 
Apollo is represented as a god in person, I would use the former 
interpretation; and where the effects of the sun are described, I would 
make choice of the latter. Upon the whole, it will be necessary to 
avoid that perpetual repetition of the same epithets which we find in 
Homer, and which, though it might be accommodated (as has been already 
shown) to the ear of those times, is by no means so to ours: but one 
may wait for opportunities of placing them, where they derive an 
additional beauty from the occasions on which they are employed; and in 
doing this properly, a translator may at once show his fancy and his 
judgment. 
As for Homera__s repetitions, we may divide them into three sorts: of 
whole narrations and speeches, of single sentences, and of one verse or 
hemistitch. I hope it is not impossible to have such a regard to these, 
as neither to lose so known a mark of the author on the one hand, nor 
to offend the reader too much on the other. The repetition is not 
ungraceful in those speeches, where the dignity of the speaker renders 
it a sort of insolence to alter his words; as in the messages from gods 
to men, or from higher powers to inferiors in concerns of state, or 
where the ceremonial of religion seems to require it, in the solemn 
forms of prayers, oaths, or the like. In other cases, I believe the 
best rule is, to be guided by the nearness, or distance, at which the 
repetitions are placed in the original: when they follow too close, one 
may vary the expression; but it is a question, whether a professed 
translator be authorized to omit any: if they be tedious, the author is 
to answer for it. 
It only remains to speak of the versification. Homer (as has been said) 
is perpetually applying the sound to the sense, and varying it on every 
new subject. This is indeed one of the most exquisite beauties of 
poetry, and attainable by very few: I only know of Homer eminent for it 
in the Greek, and Virgil in the Latin. I am sensible it is what may 
sometimes happen by chance, when a writer is warm, and fully[pg xliv] 
possessed of his image: however, it may reasonably be believed they 
designed this, in whose verse it so manifestly appears in a superior 
degree to all others. Few readers have the ear to be judges of it: but 
those who have, will see I have endeavoured at this beauty. 
Upon the whole, I must confess myself utterly incapable of doing 
justice to Homer. I attempt him in no other hope but that which one may 
entertain without much vanity, of giving a more tolerable copy of him 
than any entire translation in verse has yet done. We have only those 
of Chapman, Hobbes, and Ogilby. Chapman has taken the advantage of an 
immeasurable length of verse, notwithstanding which, there is scarce 
any paraphrase more loose and rambling than his. He has frequent 
interpolations of four or six lines; and I remember one in the 
thirteenth book of the Odyssey, ver. 312, where he has spun twenty 
verses out of two. He is often mistaken in so bold a manner, that one 
might think he deviated on purpose, if he did not in other places of 
his notes insist so much upon verbal trifles. He appears to have had a 
strong affectation of extracting new meanings out of his author; 
insomuch as to promise, in his rhyming preface, a poem of the mysteries 
he had revealed in Homer; and perhaps he endeavoured to strain the 
obvious sense to this end. His expression is involved in fustian; a 
fault for which he was remarkable in his original writings, as in the 
tragedy of Bussy da__Amboise, &c. In a word, the nature of the man may 
account for his whole performance; for he appears, from his preface and 
remarks, to have been of an arrogant turn, and an enthusiast in poetry. 
His own boast, of having finished half the Iliad in less than fifteen 
weeks, shows with what negligence his version was performed. But that 
which is to be allowed him, and which very much contributed to cover 
his defects, is a daring fiery spirit that animates his translation, 
which is something like what one might imagine Homer himself would have 
writ before he arrived at years of discretion. 
Hobbes has given us a correct explanation of the sense in general; but 
for particulars and circumstances he continually lops them, and often 
omits the most beautiful. As for its being esteemed a close 
translation, I doubt not many have been led into that error by the 
shortness of it, which proceeds not from his following the original 
line by line, but from the contractions above mentioned. He sometimes 
omits whole similes and sentences; and is now and then guilty of 
mistakes, into which no writer of his learning could have fallen, but 
through carelessness. His poetry, as well as Ogilbya__s, is too mean for 
criticism. 
It is a great loss to the poetical world that Mr. Dryden did not live 
to translate the Iliad. He has left us only the first book, and a small 
part of the sixth; in which if he has in some places not truly 
interpreted the sense, or preserved the antiquities, it ought to be 
excused on account of the haste he was obliged to write in. He seems to 
have had too much regard to Chapman, whose words he sometimes copies, 
and has unhappily followed him in passages where he wanders from the 
original. However, had he translated the whole work, I would no more 
have attempted Homer after him than Virgil: his version of whom 
(notwithstanding some human errors) is the most noble and spirited 
translation I know in any language. But the fate of great geniuses is 
like[pg xlv] that of great ministers: though they are confessedly the 
first in the commonwealth of letters, they must be envied and 
calumniated only for being at the head of it. 
That which, in my opinion, ought to be the endeavour of any one who 
translates Homer, is above all things to keep alive that spirit and 
fire which makes his chief character: in particular places, where the 
sense can bear any doubt, to follow the strongest and most poetical, as 
most agreeing with that character; to copy him in all the variations of 
his style, and the different modulations of his numbers; to preserve, 
in the more active or descriptive parts, a warmth and elevation; in the 
more sedate or narrative, a plainness and solemnity; in the speeches, a 
fulness and perspicuity; in the sentences, a shortness and gravity; not 
to neglect even the little figures and turns on the words, nor 
sometimes the very cast of the periods; neither to omit nor confound 
any rites or customs of antiquity: perhaps too he ought to include the 
whole in a shorter compass than has hitherto been done by any 
translator who has tolerably preserved either the sense or poetry. What 
I would further recommend to him is, to study his author rather from 
his own text, than from any commentaries, how learned soever, or 
whatever figure they may make in the estimation of the world; to 
consider him attentively in comparison with Virgil above all the 
ancients, and with Milton above all the moderns. Next these, the 
Archbishop of Cambraya__s Telemachus may give him the truest idea of the 
spirit and turn of our author; and Bossua__s admirable Treatise of the 
Epic Poem the justest notion of his design and conduct. But after all, 
with whatever judgment and study a man may proceed, or with whatever 
happiness he may perform such a work, he must hope to please but a few; 
those only who have at once a taste of poetry, and competent learning. 
For to satisfy such a want either, is not in the nature of this 
undertaking; since a mere modern wit can like nothing that is not 
modern, and a pedant nothing that is not Greek. 
What I have done is submitted to the public; from whose opinions I am 
prepared to learn; though I fear no judges so little as our best poets, 
who are most sensible of the weight of this task. As for the worst, 
whatever they shall please to say, they may give me some concern as 
they are unhappy men, but none as they are malignant writers. I was 
guided in this translation by judgments very different from theirs, and 
by persons for whom they can have no kindness, if an old observation be 
true, that the strongest antipathy in the world is that of fools to men 
of wit. Mr. Addison was the first whose advice determined me to 
undertake this task; who was pleased to write to me upon that occasion 
in such terms as I cannot repeat without vanity. I was obliged to Sir 
Richard Steele for a very early recommendation of my undertaking to the 
public. Dr. Swift promoted my interest with that warmth with which he 
always serves his friend. The humanity and frankness of Sir Samuel 
Garth are what I never knew wanting on any occasion. I must also 
acknowledge, with infinite pleasure, the many friendly offices, as well 
as sincere criticisms, of Mr. Congreve, who had led me the way in 
translating some parts of Homer. I must add the names of Mr. Rowe, and 
Dr. Parnell, though I shall take a further opportunity of doing justice 
to the last, whose good nature (to[pg xlvi] give it a great panegyric), 
is no less extensive than his learning. The favour of these gentlemen 
is not entirely undeserved by one who bears them so true an affection. 
But what can I say of the honour so many of the great have done me; 
while the first names of the age appear as my subscribers, and the most 
distinguished patrons and ornaments of learning as my chief 
encouragers? Among these it is a particular pleasure to me to find, 
that my highest obligations are to such who have done most honour to 
the name of poet: that his grace the Duke of Buckingham was not 
displeased I should undertake the author to whom he has given (in his 
excellent Essay), so complete a praise: 
a_oeRead Homer once, and you can read no more; 
For all books else appear so mean, so poor, 
Verse will seem prose: but still persist to read, 
And Homer will be all the books you need.a__ 
That the Earl of Halifax was one of the first to favour me; of whom it is hard to say whether the advancement of the polite arts is more owing to his generosity or his example: that such a genius as my Lord Bolingbroke, not more distinguished in the great scenes of business, than in all the useful and entertaining parts of learning, has not refused to be the critic of these sheets, and the patron of their writer: and that the noble author of the tragedy of a_oeHeroic Lovea__ has continued his partiality to me, from my writing pastorals to my attempting the Iliad. I cannot deny myself the pride of confessing, that I have had the advantage not only of their advice for the conduct in general, but their correction of several particulars of this translation. 
I could say a great deal of the pleasure of being distinguished by the 
Earl of Carnarvon; but it is almost absurd to particularize any one 
generous action in a person whose whole life is a continued series of 
them. Mr. Stanhope, the present secretary of state, will pardon my 
desire of having it known that he was pleased to promote this affair. 
The particular zeal of Mr. Harcourt (the son of the late Lord 
Chancellor) gave me a proof how much I am honoured in a share of his 
friendship. I must attribute to the same motive that of several others 
of my friends: to whom all acknowledgments are rendered unnecessary by 
the privileges of a familiar correspondence; and I am satisfied I can 
no way better oblige men of their turn than by my silence. 
In short, I have found more patrons than ever Homer wanted. He would 
have thought himself happy to have met the same favour at Athens that 
has been shown me by its learned rival, the University of Oxford. And I 
can hardly envy him those pompous honours he received after death, when 
I reflect on the enjoyment of so many agreeable obligations, and easy 
friendships, which make the satisfaction of life. This distinction is 
the more to be acknowledged, as it is shown to one whose pen has never 
gratified the prejudices of particular parties, or the vanities of 
particular men. Whatever the success may prove, I shall never repent of 
an undertaking in which I have experienced the candour and friendship 
of so many persons of merit; and in which I hope to pass some of those 
years of youth that are generally lost in a circle of follies, after a 
manner neither wholly unuseful to others, nor disagreeable to myself. 
[pg 001] 
THE ILIAD. 
BOOK I. 
ARGUMENT.40 
THE CONTENTION OF ACHILLES AND AGAMEMNON. 
In the war of Troy, the Greeks having sacked some of the neighbouring 
towns, and taken from thence two beautiful captives, Chryseis and 
Briseis, allotted the first to Agamemnon, and the last to Achilles. 
Chryses, the father of Chryseis, and priest of Apollo, comes to the 
Grecian camp to ransom her; with which the action of the poem opens, in 
the tenth year of the siege. The priest being refused, and insolently 
dismissed by Agamemnon, entreats for vengeance from his god; who 
inflicts a pestilence on the Greeks. Achilles calls a council, and 
encourages Chalcas to declare the cause of it; who attributes it to the 
refusal of Chryseis. The king, being obliged to send back his captive, 
enters into a furious contest with Achilles, which Nestor pacifies; 
however, as he had the absolute command of the army, he seizes on 
Briseis in revenge. Achilles in discontent withdraws himself and his 
forces from the rest of the Greeks; and complaining to Thetis, she 
supplicates Jupiter to render them sensible of the wrong done to her 
son, by giving victory to the Trojans. Jupiter, granting her suit, 
incenses Juno: between whom the debate runs high, till they are 
reconciled by the address of Vulcan. 
The time of two-and-twenty days is taken up in this book: nine during 
the plague, one in the council and quarrel of the princes, and twelve 
for Jupitera__s stay with the A_thiopians, at whose return Thetis prefers 
her petition. The scene lies in the Grecian camp, then changes to 
Chrysa, and lastly to Olympus. 
Achillesa__ wrath, to Greece the direful spring 
Of woes unnumbera__d, heavenly goddess, sing! 
That wrath which hurla__d to Plutoa__s gloomy reign 
The souls of mighty chiefs untimely slain; 
[pg 002] 
Whose limbs unburied on the naked shore, 
Devouring dogs and hungry vultures tore.41 
Since great Achilles and Atrides strove, 
Such was the sovereign doom, and such the will of Jove!42 
Declare, O Muse! in what ill-fated hour43 
Sprung the fierce strife, from what offended power 
Latonaa__s son a dire contagion spread,44 
And heapa__d the camp with mountains of the dead; 
The king of men his reverent priest defied,45 
And for the kinga__s offence the people died. 
For Chryses sought with costly gifts to gain 
His captive daughter from the victora__s chain. 
Suppliant the venerable father stands; 
Apolloa__s awful ensigns grace his hands 
By these he begs; and lowly bending down, 
Extends the sceptre and the laurel crown 
He sued to all, but chief implored for grace 
The brother-kings, of Atreusa__ royal race46 
a_oeYe kings and warriors! may your vows be crowna__d, 
And Troya__s proud walls lie level with the ground. 
May Jove restore you when your toils are oa__er 
Safe to the pleasures of your native shore. 
But, oh! relieve a wretched parenta__s pain, 
And give Chryseis to these arms again; 
If mercy fail, yet let my presents move, 
And dread avenging Phoebus, son of Jove.a__ 
The Greeks in shouts their joint assent declare, 
The priest to reverence, and release the fair. 
Not so Atrides; he, with kingly pride, 
Repulsed the sacred sire, and thus replied: 
a_oeHence on thy life, and fly these hostile plains, 
Nor ask, presumptuous, what the king detains 
Hence, with thy laurel crown, and golden rod, 
Nor trust too far those ensigns of thy god. 
[pg 003] 
Mine is thy daughter, priest, and shall remain; 
And prayers, and tears, and bribes, shall plead in vain; 
Till time shall rifle every youthful grace, 
And age dismiss her from my cold embrace, 
In daily labours of the loom employa__d, 
Or dooma__d to deck the bed she once enjoya__d 
Hence then; to Argos shall the maid retire, 
Far from her native soil and weeping sire.a__ 
Illustration: HOMER INVOKING THE MUSE. 
HOMER INVOKING THE MUSE. 
The trembling priest along the shore returna__d, 
And in the anguish of a father mourna__d. 
Disconsolate, not daring to complain, 
Silent he wandera__d by the sounding main; 
Till, safe at distance, to his god he prays, 
The god who darts around the world his rays. 
a_oeO Smintheus! sprung from fair Latonaa__s line,47 
Thou guardian power of Cilla the divine,48 
Thou source of light! whom Tenedos adores, 
And whose bright presence gilds thy Chrysaa__s shores. 
[pg 004] 
If ea__er with wreaths I hung thy sacred fane,49 
Or fed the flames with fat of oxen slain; 
God of the silver bow! thy shafts employ, 
Avenge thy servant, and the Greeks destroy.a__ 
Thus Chryses praya__d.a_"the favouring power attends, 
And from Olympusa__ lofty tops descends. 
Bent was his bow, the Grecian hearts to wound;50 
Fierce as he moved, his silver shafts resound. 
Breathing revenge, a sudden night he spread, 
And gloomy darkness rolla__d about his head. 
The fleet in view, he twanga__d his deadly bow, 
And hissing fly the feathera__d fates below. 
On mules and dogs the infection first began;51 
And last, the vengeful arrows fixa__d in man. 
For nine long nights, through all the dusky air, 
The pyres, thick-flaming, shot a dismal glare. 
But ere the tenth revolving day was run, 
Inspired by Juno, Thetisa__ godlike son 
Convened to council all the Grecian train; 
For much the goddess mourna__d her heroes slain.52 
The assembly seated, rising oa__er the rest, 
Achilles thus the king of men addressa__d: 
a_oeWhy leave we not the fatal Trojan shore, 
And measure back the seas we crossa__d before? 
The plague destroying whom the sword would spare, 
a__Tis time to save the few remains of war. 
But let some prophet, or some sacred sage, 
Explore the cause of great Apolloa__s rage; 
Or learn the wasteful vengeance to remove 
By mystic dreams, for dreams descend from Jove.53 
[pg 005] 
If broken vows this heavy curse have laid, 
Let altars smoke, and hecatombs be paid. 
So Heaven, atoned, shall dying Greece restore, 
And Phoebus dart his burning shafts no more.a__ 
He said, and sat: when Chalcas thus replied; 
Chalcas the wise, the Grecian priest and guide, 
That sacred seer, whose comprehensive view, 
The past, the present, and the future knew: 
Uprising slow, the venerable sage 
Thus spoke the prudence and the fears of age: 
a_oeBeloved of Jove, Achilles! woulda__st thou know 
Why angry Phoebus bends his fatal bow? 
First give thy faith, and plight a princea__s word 
Of sure protection, by thy power and sword: 
For I must speak what wisdom would conceal, 
And truths, invidious to the great, reveal, 
Bold is the task, when subjects, grown too wise, 
Instruct a monarch where his error lies; 
For though we deem the short-lived fury past, 
a__Tis sure the mighty will revenge at last.a__ 
To whom Pelides:a_"a_oeFrom thy inmost soul 
Speak what thou knowa__st, and speak without control. 
Ea__en by that god I swear who rules the day, 
To whom thy hands the vows of Greece convey. 
And whose blessa__d oracles thy lips declare; 
Long as Achilles breathes this vital air, 
No daring Greek, of all the numerous band, 
Against his priest shall lift an impious hand; 
Not ea__en the chief by whom our hosts are led, 
The king of kings, shall touch that sacred head.a__ 
Encouraged thus, the blameless man replies: 
a_oeNor vows unpaid, nor slighted sacrifice, 
But he, our chief, provoked the raging pest, 
Apolloa__s vengeance for his injured priest. 
Nor will the goda__s awakena__d fury cease, 
But plagues shall spread, and funeral fires increase, 
Till the great king, without a ransom paid, 
To her own Chrysa send the black-eyed maid.54 
Perhaps, with added sacrifice and prayer, 
The priest may pardon, and the god may spare.a__ 
The prophet spoke: when with a gloomy frown 
The monarch started from his shining throne; 
Black choler filla__d his breast that boila__d with ire, 
And from his eye-balls flasha__d the living fire: 
a_oeAugur accursed! denouncing mischief still, 
Prophet of plagues, for ever boding ill! 
Still must that tongue some wounding message bring, 
And still thy priestly pride provoke thy king? 
[pg 006] 
For this are Phoebusa__ oracles explored, 
To teach the Greeks to murmur at their lord? 
For this with falsehood is my honour staina__d, 
Is heaven offended, and a priest profaned; 
Because my prize, my beauteous maid, I hold, 
And heavenly charms prefer to proffera__d gold? 
A maid, unmatcha__d in manners as in face, 
Skilla__d in each art, and crowna__d with every grace; 
Not half so dear were Clytaemnestraa__s charms, 
When first her blooming beauties blessa__d my arms. 
Yet, if the gods demand her, let her sail; 
Our cares are only for the public weal: 
Let me be deema__d the hateful cause of all, 
And suffer, rather than my people fall. 
The prize, the beauteous prize, I will resign, 
So dearly valued, and so justly mine. 
But since for common good I yield the fair, 
My private loss let grateful Greece repair; 
Nor unrewarded let your prince complain, 
That he alone has fought and bled in vain.a__ 
a_oeInsatiate king (Achilles thus replies), 
Fond of the power, but fonder of the prize! 
Woulda__st thou the Greeks their lawful prey should yield, 
The due reward of many a well-fought field? 
The spoils of cities razed and warriors slain, 
We share with justice, as with toil we gain; 
But to resume whatea__er thy avarice craves 
(That trick of tyrants) may be borne by slaves. 
Yet if our chief for plunder only fight, 
The spoils of Ilion shall thy loss requite, 
Whenea__er, by Jovea__s decree, our conquering powers 
Shall humble to the dust her lofty towers.a__ 
Then thus the king: a_oeShall I my prize resign 
With tame content, and thou possessa__d of thine? 
Great as thou art, and like a god in fight, 
Think not to rob me of a soldiera__s right. 
At thy demand shall I restore the maid? 
First let the just equivalent be paid; 
Such as a king might ask; and let it be 
A treasure worthy her, and worthy me. 
Or grant me this, or with a monarcha__s claim 
This hand shall seize some other captive dame. 
The mighty Ajax shall his prize resign;55 
Ulyssesa__ spoils, or even thy own, be mine. 
The man who suffers, loudly may complain; 
And rage he may, but he shall rage in vain. 
But this when time requires.a_"It now remains 
We launch a bark to plough the watery plains, 
[pg 007] 
And waft the sacrifice to Chrysaa__s shores, 
With chosen pilots, and with labouring oars. 
Soon shall the fair the sable ship ascend, 
And some deputed prince the charge attend: 
This Cretaa__s king, or Ajax shall fulfil, 
Or wise Ulysses see performa__d our will; 
Or, if our royal pleasure shall ordain, 
Achillesa__ self conduct her oa__er the main; 
Let fierce Achilles, dreadful in his rage, 
The god propitiate, and the pest assuage.a__ 
Illustration: MARS. 
MARS. 
At this, Pelides, frowning stern, replied: 
a_oeO tyrant, arma__d with insolence and pride! 
Inglorious slave to interest, ever joina__d 
With fraud, unworthy of a royal mind! 
What generous Greek, obedient to thy word, 
Shall form an ambush, or shall lift the sword? 
What cause have I to war at thy decree? 
The distant Trojans never injured me; 
To Phthiaa__s realms no hostile troops they led: 
Safe in her vales my warlike coursers fed; 
Far hence removed, the hoarse-resounding main, 
And walls of rocks, secure my native reign, 
Whose fruitful soil luxuriant harvests grace, 
Rich in her fruits, and in her martial race. 
Hither we saila__d, a voluntary throng, 
To avenge a private, not a public wrong: 
What else to Troy the assembled nations draws, 
But thine, ungrateful, and thy brothera__s cause? 
Is this the pay our blood and toils deserve; 
Disgraced and injured by the man we serve? 
And darest thou threat to snatch my prize away, 
Due to the deeds of many a dreadful day? 
A prize as small, O tyrant! matcha__d with thine, 
As thy own actions if compared to mine. 
Thine in each conquest is the wealthy prey, 
Though mine the sweat and danger of the day. 
Some trivial present to my ships I bear: 
Or barren praises pay the wounds of war. 
[pg 008] 
But know, proud monarch, Ia__m thy slave no more; 
My fleet shall waft me to Thessaliaa__s shore: 
Left by Achilles on the Trojan plain, 
What spoils, what conquests, shall Atrides gain?a__ 
To this the king: a_oeFly, mighty warrior! fly; 
Thy aid we need not, and thy threats defy. 
There want not chiefs in such a cause to fight, 
And Jove himself shall guard a monarcha__s right. 
Of all the kings (the goda__s distinguisha__d care) 
To power superior none such hatred bear: 
Strife and debate thy restless soul employ, 
And wars and horrors are thy savage joy, 
If thou hast strength, a__twas Heaven that strength bestowa__d; 
For know, vain man! thy valour is from God. 
Haste, launch thy vessels, fly with speed away; 
Rule thy own realms with arbitrary sway; 
I heed thee not, but prize at equal rate 
Thy short-lived friendship, and thy groundless hate. 
Go, threat thy earth-born Myrmidons:a_"but here56 
a__Tis mine to threaten, prince, and thine to fear. 
Know, if the god the beauteous dame demand, 
My bark shall waft her to her native land; 
But then prepare, imperious prince! prepare, 
Fierce as thou art, to yield thy captive fair: 
Even in thy tent Ia__ll seize the blooming prize, 
Thy loved Briseis with the radiant eyes. 
Hence shalt thou prove my might, and curse the hour 
Thou stooda__st a rival of imperial power; 
And hence, to all our hosts it shall be known, 
That kings are subject to the gods alone.a__ 
Achilles heard, with grief and rage oppressa__d, 
His heart swella__d high, and laboura__d in his breast; 
Distracting thoughts by turns his bosom ruled; 
Now fired by wrath, and now by reason coola__d: 
That prompts his hand to draw the deadly sword, 
Force through the Greeks, and pierce their haughty lord; 
This whispers soft his vengeance to control, 
And calm the rising tempest of his soul. 
Just as in anguish of suspense he staya__d, 
While half unsheathed appeara__d the glittering blade,57 
[pg 009] 
Minerva swift descended from above, 
Sent by the sister and the wife of Jove 
(For both the princes claima__d her equal care); 
Behind she stood, and by the golden hair 
Achilles seized; to him alone confessa__d; 
A sable cloud conceala__d her from the rest. 
He sees, and sudden to the goddess cries, 
Known by the flames that sparkle from her eyes: 
Illustration: MINERVA REPRESSING THE FURY OF ACHILLES. 
MINERVA REPRESSING THE FURY OF ACHILLES. 
a_oeDescends Minerva, in her guardian care, 
A heavenly witness of the wrongs I bear 
From Atreusa__ son?a_"Then let those eyes that view 
The daring crime, behold the vengeance too.a__ 
a_oeForbear (the progeny of Jove replies) 
To calm thy fury I forsake the skies: 
Let great Achilles, to the gods resigna__d, 
To reason yield the empire oa__er his mind. 
By awful Juno this command is given; 
The king and you are both the care of heaven. 
The force of keen reproaches let him feel; 
But sheathe, obedient, thy revenging steel. 
For I pronounce (and trust a heavenly power) 
Thy injured honour has its fated hour, 
When the proud monarch shall thy arms implores 
And bribe thy friendship with a boundless store. 
Then let revenge no longer bear the sway; 
Command thy passions, and the gods obey.a__ 
To her Pelides:a_"a_oeWith regardful ear, 
a__Tis just, O goddess! I thy dictates hear. 
[pg 010] 
Hard as it is, my vengeance I suppress: 
Those who revere the gods the gods will bless.a__ 
He said, observant of the blue-eyed maid; 
Then in the sheath returna__d the shining blade. 
The goddess swift to high Olympus flies, 
And joins the sacred senate of the skies. 
Nor yet the rage his boiling breast forsook, 
Which thus redoubling on Atrides broke: 
a_oeO monster! mixa__d of insolence and fear, 
Thou dog in forehead, but in heart a deer! 
When wert thou known in ambusha__d fights to dare, 
Or nobly face the horrid front of war? 
a__Tis ours, the chance of fighting fields to try; 
Thine to look on, and bid the valiant die: 
So much a__tis safer through the camp to go, 
And rob a subject, than despoil a foe. 
Scourge of thy people, violent and base! 
Sent in Jovea__s anger on a slavish race; 
Who, lost to sense of generous freedom past, 
Are tamed to wrongs;a_"or this had been thy last. 
Now by this sacred sceptre hear me swear, 
Which never more shall leaves or blossoms bear, 
Which severa__d from the trunk (as I from thee) 
On the bare mountains left its parent tree; 
This sceptre, forma__d by tempera__d steel to prove 
An ensign of the delegates of Jove, 
From whom the power of laws and justice springs 
(Tremendous oath! inviolate to kings); 
By this I swear:a_"when bleeding Greece again 
Shall call Achilles, she shall call in vain. 
When, flusha__d with slaughter, Hector comes to spread 
The purpled shore with mountains of the dead, 
Then shall thou mourn the affront thy madness gave, 
Forced to deplore when impotent to save: 
Then rage in bitterness of soul to know 
This act has made the bravest Greek thy foe.a__ 
He spoke; and furious hurla__d against the ground 
His sceptre starra__d with golden studs around: 
Then sternly silent sat. With like disdain 
The raging king returna__d his frowns again. 
To calm their passion with the words of age, 
Slow from his seat arose the Pylian sage, 
Experienced Nestor, in persuasion skilla__d; 
Words, sweet as honey, from his lips distilla__d:58 
Two generations now had passa__d away, 
Wise by his rules, and happy by his sway; 
Two ages oa__er his native realm he reigna__d, 
[pg 011] 
And now the example of the third remaina__d. 
All viewa__d with awe the venerable man; 
Who thus with mild benevolence began:a_" 
a_oeWhat shame, what woe is this to Greece! what joy 
To Troya__s proud monarch, and the friends of Troy! 
That adverse gods commit to stern debate 
The best, the bravest, of the Grecian state. 
Young as ye are, this youthful heat restrain, 
Nor think your Nestora__s years and wisdom vain. 
A godlike race of heroes once I knew, 
Such as no more these aged eyes shall view! 
Lives there a chief to match Pirithousa__ fame, 
Dryas the bold, or Ceneusa__ deathless name; 
Theseus, endued with more than mortal might, 
Or Polyphemus, like the gods in fight? 
With these of old, to toils of battle bred, 
In early youth my hardy days I led; 
Fired with the thirst which virtuous envy breeds, 
And smit with love of honourable deeds, 
Strongest of men, they pierced the mountain boar, 
Ranged the wild deserts red with monstersa__ gore, 
And from their hills the shaggy Centaurs tore: 
Yet these with soft persuasive arts I swaya__d; 
When Nestor spoke, they listena__d and obeya__d. 
If in my youth, even these esteema__d me wise; 
Do you, young warriors, hear my age advise. 
Atrides, seize not on the beauteous slave; 
That prize the Greeks by common suffrage gave: 
Nor thou, Achilles, treat our prince with pride; 
Let kings be just, and sovereign power preside. 
Thee, the first honours of the war adorn, 
Like gods in strength, and of a goddess born; 
Him, awful majesty exalts above 
The powers of earth, and sceptred sons of Jove. 
Let both unite with well-consenting mind, 
So shall authority with strength be joina__d. 
Leave me, O king! to calm Achillesa__ rage; 
Rule thou thyself, as more advanced in age. 
Forbid it, gods! Achilles should be lost, 
The pride of Greece, and bulwark of our host.a__ 
This said, he ceased. The king of men replies: 
a_oeThy years are awful, and thy words are wise. 
But that imperious, that unconquera__d soul, 
No laws can limit, no respect control. 
Before his pride must his superiors fall; 
His word the law, and he the lord of all? 
Him must our hosts, our chiefs, ourself obey? 
What king can bear a rival in his sway? 
Grant that the gods his matchless force have given; 
Has foul reproach a privilege from heaven?a__ 
[pg 012] 
Here on the monarcha__s speech Achilles broke, 
And furious, thus, and interrupting spoke: 
a_oeTyrant, I well deserved thy galling chain, 
To live thy slave, and still to serve in vain, 
Should I submit to each unjust decree:a_" 
Command thy vassals, but command not me. 
Seize on Briseis, whom the Grecians dooma__d 
My prize of war, yet tamely see resumed; 
And seize secure; no more Achilles draws 
His conquering sword in any womana__s cause. 
The gods command me to forgive the past: 
But let this first invasion be the last: 
For know, thy blood, when next thou darest invade, 
Shall stream in vengeance on my reeking blade.a__ 
At this they ceased: the stern debate expired: 
The chiefs in sullen majesty retired. 
Achilles with Patroclus took his way 
Where near his tents his hollow vessels lay. 
Meantime Atrides launcha__d with numerous oars 
A well-rigga__d ship for Chrysaa__s sacred shores: 
High on the deck was fair Chryseis placed, 
And sage Ulysses with the conduct graced: 
Safe in her sides the hecatomb they stowa__d, 
Then swiftly sailing, cut the liquid road. 
The host to expiate next the king prepares, 
With pure lustrations, and with solemn prayers. 
Washa__d by the briny wave, the pious train59 
Are cleansed; and cast the ablutions in the main. 
Along the shore whole hecatombs were laid, 
And bulls and goats to Phoebusa__ altars paid; 
The sable fumes in curling spires arise, 
And waft their grateful odours to the skies. 
The army thus in sacred rites engaged, 
Atrides still with deep resentment raged. 
To wait his will two sacred heralds stood, 
Talthybius and Eurybates the good. 
a_oeHaste to the fierce Achillesa__ tent (he cries), 
Thence bear Briseis as our royal prize: 
Submit he must; or if they will not part, 
Ourself in arms shall tear her from his heart.a__ 
The unwilling heralds act their lorda__s commands; 
Pensive they walk along the barren sands: 
Arrived, the hero in his tent they find, 
With gloomy aspect on his arm reclined. 
At awful distance long they silent stand, 
Loth to advance, and speak their hard command; 
[pg 013] 
Decent confusion! This the godlike man 
Perceived, and thus with accent mild began: 
a_oeWith leave and honour enter our abodes, 
Ye sacred ministers of men and gods!60 
I know your message; by constraint you came; 
Not you, but your imperious lord I blame. 
Patroclus, haste, the fair Briseis bring; 
Conduct my captive to the haughty king. 
But witness, heralds, and proclaim my vow, 
Witness to gods above, and men below! 
But first, and loudest, to your prince declare 
(That lawless tyrant whose commands you bear), 
Unmoved as death Achilles shall remain, 
Though prostrate Greece shall bleed at every vein: 
The raging chief in frantic passion lost, 
Blind to himself, and useless to his host, 
Unskilla__d to judge the future by the past, 
In blood and slaughter shall repent at last.a__ 
Illustration: THE DEPARTURE OF BRISEIS FROM THE TENT OF ACHILLES. 
THE DEPARTURE OF BRISEIS FROM THE TENT OF ACHILLES. 
Patroclus now the unwilling beauty brought; 
She, in soft sorrows, and in pensive thought, 
Passa__d silent, as the heralds held her hand, 
And of looka__d back, slow-moving oa__er the strand. 
Not so his loss the fierce Achilles bore; 
But sad, retiring to the sounding shore, 
[pg 014] 
Oa__er the wild margin of the deep he hung, 
That kindred deep from whence his mother sprung:61 
There bathed in tears of anger and disdain, 
Thus loud lamented to the stormy main: 
a_oeO parent goddess! since in early bloom 
Thy son must fall, by too severe a doom; 
Sure to so short a race of glory born, 
Great Jove in justice should this span adorn: 
Honour and fame at least the thunderer owed; 
And ill he pays the promise of a god, 
If yon proud monarch thus thy son defies, 
Obscures my glories, and resumes my prize.a__ 
Far from the deep recesses of the main, 
Where aged Ocean holds his watery reign, 
The goddess-mother heard. The waves divide; 
And like a mist she rose above the tide; 
Beheld him mourning on the naked shores, 
And thus the sorrows of his soul explores. 
a_oeWhy grieves my son? Thy anguish let me share; 
Reveal the cause, and trust a parenta__s care.a__ 
He deeply sighing said: a_oeTo tell my woe 
Is but to mention what too well you know. 
From Thebe, sacred to Apolloa__s name62 
(Aetiona__s realm), our conquering army came, 
With treasure loaded and triumphant spoils, 
Whose just division crowna__d the soldiera__s toils; 
But bright Chryseis, heavenly prize! was led, 
By vote selected, to the generala__s bed. 
The priest of Phoebus sought by gifts to gain 
His beauteous daughter from the victora__s chain; 
The fleet he reacha__d, and, lowly bending down, 
Held forth the sceptre and the laurel crown, 
Intreating all; but chief implored for grace 
The brother-kings of Atreusa__ royal race: 
The generous Greeks their joint consent declare, 
The priest to reverence, and release the fair; 
Not so Atrides: he, with wonted pride, 
The sire insulted, and his gifts denied: 
The insulted sire (his goda__s peculiar care) 
To Phoebus praya__d, and Phoebus heard the prayer: 
A dreadful plague ensues: the avenging darts 
Incessant fly, and pierce the Grecian hearts. 
[pg 015] 
A prophet then, inspired by heaven, arose, 
And points the crime, and thence derives the woes: 
Myself the first the assembled chiefs incline 
To avert the vengeance of the power divine; 
Then rising in his wrath, the monarch storma__d; 
Incensed he threatena__d, and his threats performa__d: 
The fair Chryseis to her sire was sent, 
With offera__d gifts to make the god relent; 
But now he seized Briseisa__ heavenly charms, 
And of my valoura__s prize defrauds my arms, 
Defrauds the votes of all the Grecian train;63 
And service, faith, and justice, plead in vain. 
But, goddess! thou thy suppliant son attend. 
To high Olympusa__ shining court ascend, 
Urge all the ties to former service owed, 
And sue for vengeance to the thundering god. 
Oft hast thou triumpha__d in the glorious boast, 
That thou stooda__st forth of all the ethereal host, 
When bold rebellion shook the realms above, 
The undaunted guard of cloud-compelling Jove: 
When the bright partner of his awful reign, 
The warlike maid, and monarch of the main, 
The traitor-gods, by mad ambition driven, 
Durst threat with chains the omnipotence of Heaven. 
Then, calla__d by thee, the monster Titan came 
(Whom gods Briareus, men A_geon name), 
[pg 016] 
Through wondering skies enormous stalka__d along; 
Not he that shakes the solid earth so strong: 
With giant-pride at Jovea__s high throne he stands, 
And brandisha__d round him all his hundred hands: 
The affrighted gods confessa__d their awful lord, 
They droppa__d the fetters, trembled, and adored.64 
This, goddess, this to his remembrance call, 
Embrace his knees, at his tribunal fall; 
Conjure him far to drive the Grecian train, 
To hurl them headlong to their fleet and main, 
To heap the shores with copious death, and bring 
The Greeks to know the curse of such a king. 
Let Agamemnon lift his haughty head 
Oa__er all his wide dominion of the dead, 
And mourn in blood that ea__er he durst disgrace 
The boldest warrior of the Grecian race.a__ 
Illustration: THETIS CALLING BRIAREUS TO THE ASSISTANCE OF JUPITER. 
THETIS CALLING BRIAREUS TO THE ASSISTANCE OF JUPITER. 
a_oeUnhappy son! (fair Thetis thus replies, 
While tears celestial trickle from her eyes) 
Why have I borne thee with a mothera__s throes, 
To Fates averse, and nursed for future woes?65 
So short a space the light of heaven to view! 
So short a space! and filla__d with sorrow too! 
O might a parenta__s careful wish prevail, 
Far, far from Ilion should thy vessels sail, 
And thou, from camps remote, the danger shun 
Which now, alas! too nearly threats my son. 
Yet (what I can) to move thy suit Ia__ll go 
To great Olympus crowna__d with fleecy snow. 
Meantime, secure within thy ships, from far 
Behold the field, not mingle in the war. 
The sire of gods and all the ethereal train, 
On the warm limits of the farthest main, 
Now mix with mortals, nor disdain to grace 
The feasts of A_thiopiaa__s blameless race,66 
[pg 017] 
Twelve days the powers indulge the genial rite, 
Returning with the twelfth revolving light. 
Then will I mount the brazen dome, and move 
The high tribunal of immortal Jove.a__ 
The goddess spoke: the rolling waves unclose; 
Then down the steep she plunged from whence she rose, 
And left him sorrowing on the lonely coast, 
In wild resentment for the fair he lost. 
In Chrysaa__s port now sage Ulysses rode; 
Beneath the deck the destined victims stowa__d: 
The sails they furla__d, they lash the mast aside, 
And droppa__d their anchors, and the pinnace tied. 
Next on the shore their hecatomb they land; 
Chryseis last descending on the strand. 
Her, thus returning from the furrowa__d main, 
Ulysses led to Phoebusa__ sacred fane; 
Where at his solemn altar, as the maid 
He gave to Chryses, thus the hero said: 
a_oeHail, reverend priest! to Phoebusa__ awful dome 
A suppliant I from great Atrides come: 
Unransoma__d, here receive the spotless fair; 
Accept the hecatomb the Greeks prepare; 
And may thy god who scatters darts around, 
Atoned by sacrifice, desist to wound.a__67 
At this, the sire embraced the maid again, 
So sadly lost, so lately sought in vain. 
Then near the altar of the darting king, 
Disposed in rank their hecatomb they bring; 
With water purify their hands, and take 
The sacred offering of the salted cake; 
While thus with arms devoutly raised in air, 
And solemn voice, the priest directs his prayer: 
a_oeGod of the silver bow, thy ear incline, 
Whose power incircles Cilla the divine; 
Whose sacred eye thy Tenedos surveys, 
And gilds fair Chrysa with distinguisha__d rays! 
If, fired to vengeance at thy priesta__s request, 
Thy direful darts inflict the raging pest: 
Once more attend! avert the wasteful woe, 
And smile propitious, and unbend thy bow.a__ 
So Chryses praya__d. Apollo heard his prayer: 
And now the Greeks their hecatomb prepare; 
Between their horns the salted barley threw, 
And, with their heads to heaven, the victims slew:68 
[pg 018] 
The limbs they sever from the inclosing hide; 
The thighs, selected to the gods, divide: 
On these, in double cauls involved with art, 
The choicest morsels lay from every part. 
The priest himself before his altar stands, 
And burns the offering with his holy hands. 
Pours the black wine, and sees the flames aspire; 
The youth with instruments surround the fire: 
The thighs thus sacrificed, and entrails dressa__d, 
The assistants part, transfix, and roast the rest: 
Then spread the tables, the repast prepare; 
Each takes his seat, and each receives his share. 
When now the rage of hunger was repressa__d, 
With pure libations they conclude the feast; 
The youths with wine the copious goblets crowna__d, 
And, pleased, dispense the flowing bowls around;69 
With hymns divine the joyous banquet ends, 
The paeans lengthena__d till the sun descends: 
The Greeks, restored, the grateful notes prolong; 
Apollo listens, and approves the song. 
a__Twas night; the chiefs beside their vessel lie, 
Till rosy morn had purpled oa__er the sky: 
Then launch, and hoist the mast: indulgent gales, 
Supplied by Phoebus, fill the swelling sails; 
The milk-white canvas bellying as they blow, 
The parted ocean foams and roars below: 
Above the bounding billows swift they flew, 
Till now the Grecian camp appeara__d in view. 
Far on the beach they haul their bark to land, 
(The crooked keel divides the yellow sand,) 
Then part, where stretcha__d along the winding bay, 
The ships and tents in mingled prospect lay. 
But raging still, amidst his navy sat 
The stern Achilles, stedfast in his hate; 
Nor mixa__d in combat, nor in council joina__d; 
But wasting cares lay heavy on his mind: 
In his black thoughts revenge and slaughter roll, 
And scenes of blood rise dreadful in his soul. 
Twelve days were past, and now the dawning light 
The gods had summona__d to the Olympian height: 
Jove, first ascending from the watery bowers, 
Leads the long order of ethereal powers. 
When, like the morning-mist in early day, 
Rose from the flood the daughter of the sea: 
[pg 019] 
And to the seats divine her flight addressa__d. 
There, far apart, and high above the rest, 
The thunderer sat; where old Olympus shrouds 
His hundred heads in heaven, and props the clouds. 
Suppliant the goddess stood: one hand she placed 
Beneath his beard, and one his knees embraced. 
a_oeIf ea__er, O father of the gods! (she said) 
My words could please thee, or my actions aid, 
Some marks of honour on my son bestow, 
And pay in glory what in life you owe. 
Fame is at least by heavenly promise due 
To life so short, and now dishonoura__d too. 
Avenge this wrong, O ever just and wise! 
Let Greece be humbled, and the Trojans rise; 
Till the proud king and all the Achaian race 
Shall heap with honours him they now disgrace.a__ 
Illustration: THETIS ENTREATING JUPITER TO HONOUR ACHILLES. 
THETIS ENTREATING JUPITER TO HONOUR ACHILLES. 
Thus Thetis spoke; but Jove in silence held 
The sacred counsels of his breast conceala__d. 
Not so repulsed, the goddess closer pressa__d, 
Still graspa__d his knees, and urged the dear request. 
a_oeO sire of gods and men! thy suppliant hear; 
Refuse, or grant; for what has Jove to fear? 
Or oh! declare, of all the powers above, 
Is wretched Thetis least the care of Jove?a__ 
She said; and, sighing, thus the god replies, 
Who rolls the thunder oa__er the vaulted skies: 
a_oeWhat hast thou aska__d? ah, why should Jove engage 
In foreign contests and domestic rage, 
[pg 020] 
The godsa__ complaints, and Junoa__s fierce alarms, 
While I, too partial, aid the Trojan arms? 
Go, lest the haughty partner of my sway 
With jealous eyes thy close access survey; 
But part in peace, secure thy prayer is sped: 
Witness the sacred honours of our head, 
The nod that ratifies the will divine, 
The faithful, fixa__d, irrevocable sign; 
This seals thy suit, and this fulfils thy vowsa_"a__ 
He spoke, and awful bends his sable brows,70 
Shakes his ambrosial curls, and gives the nod, 
The stamp of fate and sanction of the god: 
High heaven with trembling the dread signal took, 
And all Olympus to the centre shook.71 
Swift to the seas profound the goddess flies, 
Jove to his starry mansions in the skies. 
The shining synod of the immortals wait 
The coming god, and from their thrones of state 
Arising silent, wrappa__d in holy fear, 
Before the majesty of heaven appear. 
Trembling they stand, while Jove assumes the throne, 
All, but the goda__s imperious queen alone: 
Late had she viewa__d the silver-footed dame, 
And all her passions kindled into flame. 
a_oeSay, artful manager of heaven (she cries), 
Who now partakes the secrets of the skies? 
Thy Juno knows not the decrees of fate, 
In vain the partner of imperial state. 
What favourite goddess then those cares divides, 
Which Jove in prudence from his consort hides?a__ 
To this the thunderer: a_oeSeek not thou to find 
The sacred counsels of almighty mind: 
Involved in darkness likes the great decree, 
Nor can the depths of fate be pierced by thee. 
What fits thy knowledge, thou the first shalt know; 
The first of gods above, and men below; 
But thou, nor they, shall search the thoughts that roll 
Deep in the close recesses of my soul.a__ 
Full on the sire the goddess of the skies 
Rolla__d the large orbs of her majestic eyes, 
And thus returna__d:a_"a_oeAustere Saturnius, say, 
From whence this wrath, or who controls thy sway? 
[pg 021] 
Thy boundless will, for me, remains in force, 
And all thy counsels take the destined course. 
But a__tis for Greece I fear: for late was seen, 
In close consult, the silver-footed queen. 
Jove to his Thetis nothing could deny, 
Nor was the signal vain that shook the sky. 
What fatal favour has the goddess won, 
To grace her fierce, inexorable son? 
Perhaps in Grecian blood to drench the plain, 
And glut his vengeance with my people slain.a__ 
Then thus the god: a_oeO restless fate of pride, 
That strives to learn what heaven resolves to hide; 
Vain is the search, presumptuous and abhorra__d, 
Anxious to thee, and odious to thy lord. 
Let this suffice: the immutable decree 
No force can shake: what is, that ought to be. 
Goddess, submit; nor dare our will withstand, 
But dread the power of this avenging hand: 
The united strength of all the gods above 
In vain resists the omnipotence of Jove.a__ 
Illustration: VULCAN. 
VULCAN. 
The thunderer spoke, nor durst the queen reply; 
A reverent horror silenced all the sky. 
The feast disturba__d, with sorrow Vulcan saw 
His mother menaced, and the gods in awe; 
Peace at his heart, and pleasure his design, 
Thus interposed the architect divine: 
a_oeThe wretched quarrels of the mortal state 
Are far unworthy, gods! of your debate: 
Let men their days in senseless strife employ, 
We, in eternal peace and constant joy. 
Thou, goddess-mother, with our sire comply, 
Nor break the sacred union of the sky: 
Lest, roused to rage, he shake the blessa__d abodes, 
Launch the red lightning, and dethrone the gods. 
[pg 022] 
If you submit, the thunderer stands appeased; 
The gracious power is willing to be pleased.a__ 
Thus Vulcan spoke: and rising with a bound, 
The double bowl with sparkling nectar crowna__d,72 
Which held to Juno in a cheerful way, 
a_oeGoddess (he cried), be patient and obey. 
Dear as you are, if Jove his arm extend, 
I can but grieve, unable to defend 
What god so daring in your aid to move, 
Or lift his hand against the force of Jove? 
Once in your cause I felt his matchless might, 
Hurla__d headlong down from the ethereal height;73 
Tossa__d all the day in rapid circles round, 
Nor till the sun descended toucha__d the ground. 
Breathless I fell, in giddy motion lost; 
The Sinthians raised me on the Lemnian coast;74 
He said, and to her hands the goblet heaved, 
Which, with a smile, the white-arma__d queen received 
Then, to the rest he filla__d; and in his turn, 
Each to his lips applied the nectara__d urn, 
Vulcan with awkward grace his office plies, 
And unextinguisha__d laughter shakes the skies. 
Thus the blest gods the genial day prolong, 
In feasts ambrosial, and celestial song.75 
Apollo tuned the lyre; the Muses round 
With voice alternate aid the silver sound. 
[pg 023] 
Meantime the radiant sun to mortal sight 
Descending swift, rolla__d down the rapid light: 
Then to their starry domes the gods depart, 
The shining monuments of Vulcana__s art: 
Jove on his couch reclined his awful head, 
And Juno slumbera__d on the golden bed. 
Illustration: JUPITER. 
JUPITER. 
[pg 024] 
Illustration: THE APOTHEOSIS OF HOMER. 
THE APOTHEOSIS OF HOMER. 
[pg 025] 
BOOK II. 
ARGUMENT. 
THE TRIAL OF THE ARMY, AND CATALOGUE OF THE FORCES. 
Jupiter, in pursuance of the request of Thetis, sends a deceitful 
vision to Agamemnon, persuading him to lead the army to battle, in 
order to make the Greeks sensible of their want of Achilles. The 
general, who is deluded with the hopes of taking Troy without his 
assistance, but fears the army was discouraged by his absence, and the 
late plague, as well as by the length of time, contrives to make trial 
of their disposition by a stratagem. He first communicates his design 
to the princes in council, that he would propose a return to the 
soldiers, and that they should put a stop to them if the proposal was 
embraced. Then he assembles the whole host, and upon moving for a 
return to Greece, they unanimously agree to it, and run to prepare the 
ships. They are detained by the management of Ulysses, who chastises 
the insolence of Thersites. The assembly is recalled, several speeches 
made on the occasion, and at length the advice of Nestor followed, 
which was to make a general muster of the troops, and to divide them 
into their several nations, before they proceeded to battle. This gives 
occasion to the poet to enumerate all the forces of the Greeks and 
Trojans, and in a large catalogue. 
The time employed in this book consists not entirely of one day. The 
scene lies in the Grecian camp, and upon the sea-shore; towards the end 
it removes to Troy. 
Now pleasing sleep had seala__d each mortal eye, 
Stretcha__d in the tents the Grecian leaders lie: 
The immortals slumbera__d on their thrones above; 
All, but the ever-wakeful eyes of Jove.76 
To honour Thetisa__ son he bends his care, 
And plunge the Greeks in all the woes of war: 
Then bids an empty phantom rise to sight, 
And thus commands the vision of the night. 
a_oeFly hence, deluding Dream! and light as air,77 
To Agamemnona__s ample tent repair. 
[pg 026] 
Bid him in arms draw forth the embattled train, 
Lead all his Grecians to the dusty plain. 
Declare, ea__en now a__tis given him to destroy 
The lofty towers of wide-extended Troy. 
For now no more the gods with fate contend, 
At Junoa__s suit the heavenly factions end. 
Destruction hangs oa__er yon devoted wall, 
And nodding Ilion waits the impending fall.a__ 
Swift as the word the vain illusion fled, 
Descends, and hovers oa__er Atridesa__ head; 
Clothed in the figure of the Pylian sage, 
Renowna__d for wisdom, and revered for age: 
Around his temples spreads his golden wing, 
And thus the flattering dream deceives the king. 
Illustration: JUPITER SENDING THE EVIL DREAM TO AGAMEMNON. 
JUPITER SENDING THE EVIL DREAM TO AGAMEMNON. 
a_oeCanst thou, with all a monarcha__s cares oppressa__d, 
O Atreusa__ son! canst thou indulge the rest?78 
Ill fits a chief who mighty nations guides, 
Directs in council, and in war presides, 
To whom its safety a whole people owes, 
To waste long nights in indolent repose.79 
Monarch, awake! a__tis Jovea__s command I bear; 
Thou, and thy glory, claim his heavenly care. 
In just array draw forth the embattled train, 
Lead all thy Grecians to the dusty plain; 
[pg 027] 
Ea__en now, O king! a__tis given thee to destroy 
The lofty towers of wide-extended Troy. 
For now no more the gods with fate contend, 
At Junoa__s suit the heavenly factions end. 
Destruction hangs oa__er yon devoted wall, 
And nodding Ilion waits the impending fall. 
Awake, but waking this advice approve, 
And trust the vision that descends from Jove.a__ 
The phantom said; then vanisha__d from his sight, 
Resolves to air, and mixes with the night. 
A thousand schemes the monarcha__s mind employ; 
Elate in thought he sacks untaken Troy: 
Vain as he was, and to the future blind, 
Nor saw what Jove and secret fate designa__d, 
What mighty toils to either host remain, 
What scenes of grief, and numbers of the slain! 
Eager he rises, and in fancy hears 
The voice celestial murmuring in his ears. 
First on his limbs a slender vest he drew, 
Around him next the regal mantle threw, 
The embroidera__d sandals on his feet were tied; 
The starry falchion glittera__d at his side; 
And last, his arm the massy sceptre loads, 
Unstaina__d, immortal, and the gift of gods. 
Now rosy Morn ascends the court of Jove, 
Lifts up her light, and opens day above. 
The king despatcha__d his heralds with commands 
To range the camp and summon all the bands: 
The gathering hosts the monarcha__s word obey; 
While to the fleet Atrides bends his way. 
In his black ship the Pylian prince he found; 
There calls a senate of the peers around: 
The assembly placed, the king of men expressa__d 
The counsels labouring in his artful breast. 
a_oeFriends and confederates! with attentive ear 
Receive my words, and credit what you hear. 
Late as I slumbera__d in the shades of night, 
A dream divine appeara__d before my sight; 
Whose visionary form like Nestor came, 
The same in habit, and in mien the same.80 
The heavenly phantom hovera__d oa__er my head, 
a__And, dost thou sleep, O Atreusa__ son? (he said) 
Ill fits a chief who mighty nations guides, 
Directs in council, and in war presides; 
To whom its safety a whole people owes, 
To waste long nights in indolent repose. 
[pg 028] 
Monarch, awake! a__tis Jovea__s command I bear, 
Thou and thy glory claim his heavenly care. 
In just array draw forth the embattled train, 
And lead the Grecians to the dusty plain; 
Ea__en now, O king! a__tis given thee to destroy 
The lofty towers of wide-extended Troy. 
For now no more the gods with fate contend, 
At Junoa__s suit the heavenly factions end. 
Destruction hangs oa__er yon devoted wall, 
And nodding Ilion waits the impending fall. 
This hear observant, and the gods obey!a__ 
The vision spoke, and passa__d in air away. 
Now, valiant chiefs! since heaven itself alarms, 
Unite, and rouse the sons of Greece to arms. 
But first, with caution, try what yet they dare, 
Worn with nine years of unsuccessful war. 
To move the troops to measure back the main, 
Be mine; and yours the province to detain.a__ 
He spoke, and sat: when Nestor, rising said, 
(Nestor, whom Pylosa__ sandy realms obeya__d,) 
a_oePrinces of Greece, your faithful ears incline, 
Nor doubt the vision of the powers divine; 
Sent by great Jove to him who rules the host, 
Forbid it, heaven! this warning should be lost! 
Then let us haste, obey the goda__s alarms, 
And join to rouse the sons of Greece to arms.a__ 
Thus spoke the sage: the kings without delay 
Dissolve the council, and their chief obey: 
The sceptred rulers lead; the following host, 
Poura__d forth by thousands, darkens all the coast. 
As from some rocky cleft the shepherd sees 
Clustering in heaps on heaps the driving bees, 
Rolling and blackening, swarms succeeding swarms, 
With deeper murmurs and more hoarse alarms; 
Dusky they spread, a close embodied crowd, 
And oa__er the vale descends the living cloud.81 
So, from the tents and ships, a lengthena__d train 
Spreads all the beach, and wide oa__ershades the plain: 
Along the region runs a deafening sound; 
Beneath their footsteps groans the trembling ground. 
Fame flies before the messenger of Jove, 
And shining soars, and claps her wings above. 
[pg 029] 
Nine sacred heralds now, proclaiming loud82 
The monarcha__s will, suspend the listening crowd. 
Soon as the throngs in order ranged appear, 
And fainter murmurs died upon the ear, 
The king of kings his awful figure raised: 
High in his hand the golden sceptre blazed; 
The golden sceptre, of celestial flame, 
By Vulcan forma__d, from Jove to Hermes came. 
To Pelops he the immortal gift resigna__d; 
The immortal gift great Pelops left behind, 
In Atreusa__ hand, which not with Atreus ends, 
To rich Thyestes next the prize descends; 
And now the mark of Agamemnona__s reign, 
Subjects all Argos, and controls the main.83 
On this bright sceptre now the king reclined, 
And artful thus pronounced the speech designa__d: 
a_oeYe sons of Mars, partake your leadera__s care, 
Heroes of Greece, and brothers of the war! 
Of partial Jove with justice I complain, 
And heavenly oracles believed in vain 
A safe return was promised to our toils, 
Renowna__d, triumphant, and enricha__d with spoils. 
Now shameful flight alone can save the host, 
Our blood, our treasure, and our glory lost. 
So Jove decrees, resistless lord of all! 
At whose command whole empires rise or fall: 
He shakes the feeble props of human trust, 
And towns and armies humbles to the dust 
What shame to Greece a fruitful war to wage, 
Oh, lasting shame in every future age! 
Once great in arms, the common scorn we grow, 
Repulsed and baffled by a feeble foe. 
So small their number, that if wars were ceased, 
And Greece triumphant held a general feast, 
[pg 030] 
All ranka__d by tens, whole decades when they dine 
Must want a Trojan slave to pour the wine.84 
But other forces have our hopes oa__erthrown, 
And Troy prevails by armies not her own. 
Now nine long years of mighty Jove are run, 
Since first the labours of this war begun: 
Our cordage torn, decaya__d our vessels lie, 
And scarce insure the wretched power to fly. 
Haste, then, for ever leave the Trojan wall! 
Our weeping wives, our tender children call: 
Love, duty, safety, summon us away, 
a__Tis naturea__s voice, and nature we obey, 
Our shattera__d barks may yet transport us oa__er, 
Safe and inglorious, to our native shore. 
Fly, Grecians, fly, your sails and oars employ, 
And dream no more of heaven-defended Troy.a__ 
His deep design unknown, the hosts approve 
Atridesa__ speech. The mighty numbers move. 
So roll the billows to the Icarian shore, 
From east and south when winds begin to roar, 
Burst their dark mansions in the clouds, and sweep 
The whitening surface of the ruffled deep. 
And as on corn when western gusts descend,85 
Before the blast the lofty harvests bend: 
Thus oa__er the field the moving host appears, 
With nodding plumes and groves of waving spears. 
The gathering murmur spreads, their trampling feet 
Beat the loose sands, and thicken to the fleet; 
With long-resounding cries they urge the train 
To fit the ships, and launch into the main. 
They toil, they sweat, thick clouds of dust arise, 
The doubling clamours echo to the skies. 
Ea__en then the Greeks had left the hostile plain, 
And fate decreed the fall of Troy in vain; 
But Jovea__s imperial queen their flight surveya__d, 
And sighing thus bespoke the blue-eyed maid: 
a_oeShall then the Grecians fly! O dire disgrace! 
And leave unpunisha__d this perfidious race? 
Shall Troy, shall Priam, and the adulterous spouse, 
In peace enjoy the fruits of broken vows? 
And bravest chiefs, in Helena__s quarrel slain, 
Lie unrevenged on yon detested plain? 
No: let my Greeks, unmoved by vain alarms, 
Once more refulgent shine in brazen arms. 
[pg 031] 
Haste, goddess, haste! the flying host detain, 
Nor let one sail be hoisted on the main.a__ 
Pallas obeys, and from Olympusa__ height 
Swift to the ships precipitates her flight. 
Ulysses, first in public cares, she found, 
For prudent counsel like the gods renowna__d: 
Oppressa__d with generous grief the hero stood, 
Nor drew his sable vessels to the flood. 
a_oeAnd is it thus, divine Laertesa__ son, 
Thus fly the Greeks (the martial maid begun), 
Thus to their country bear their own disgrace, 
And fame eternal leave to Priama__s race? 
Shall beauteous Helen still remain unfreed, 
Still unrevenged, a thousand heroes bleed! 
Haste, generous Ithacus! prevent the shame, 
Recall your armies, and your chiefs reclaim. 
Your own resistless eloquence employ, 
And to the immortals trust the fall of Troy.a__ 
The voice divine confessa__d the warlike maid, 
Ulysses heard, nor uninspired obeya__d: 
Then meeting first Atrides, from his hand 
Received the imperial sceptre of command. 
Thus graced, attention and respect to gain, 
He runs, he flies through all the Grecian train; 
Each prince of name, or chief in arms approved, 
He fired with praise, or with persuasion moved. 
a_oeWarriors like you, with strength and wisdom blessa__d, 
By brave examples should confirm the rest. 
The monarcha__s will not yet reveala__d appears; 
He tries our courage, but resents our fears. 
The unwary Greeks his fury may provoke; 
Not thus the king in secret council spoke. 
Jove loves our chief, from Jove his honour springs, 
Beware! for dreadful is the wrath of kings.a__ 
But if a clamorous vile plebeian rose, 
Him with reproof he checka__d or tamed with blows. 
a_oeBe still, thou slave, and to thy betters yield; 
Unknown alike in council and in field! 
Ye gods, what dastards would our host command! 
Swept to the war, the lumber of a land. 
Be silent, wretch, and think not here allowa__d 
That worst of tyrants, an usurping crowd. 
To one sole monarch Jove commits the sway; 
His are the laws, and him let all obey.a__86 
With words like these the troops Ulysses ruled, 
The loudest silenced, and the fiercest coola__d. 
[pg 032] 
Back to the assembly roll the thronging train, 
Desert the ships, and pour upon the plain. 
Murmuring they move, as when old ocean roars, 
And heaves huge surges to the trembling shores; 
The groaning banks are burst with bellowing sound, 
The rocks remurmur and the deeps rebound. 
At length the tumult sinks, the noises cease, 
And a still silence lulls the camp to peace. 
Thersites only clamoura__d in the throng, 
Loquacious, loud, and turbulent of tongue: 
Awed by no shame, by no respect controlla__d, 
In scandal busy, in reproaches bold: 
With witty malice studious to defame, 
Scorn all his joy, and laughter all his aim:a_" 
But chief he gloried with licentious style 
To lash the great, and monarchs to revile. 
His figure such as might his soul proclaim; 
One eye was blinking, and one leg was lame: 
His mountain shoulders half his breast oa__erspread, 
Thin hairs bestrewa__d his long misshapen head. 
Spleen to mankind his envious heart possessa__d, 
And much he hated all, but most the best: 
Ulysses or Achilles still his theme; 
But royal scandal his delight supreme, 
Long had he lived the scorn of every Greek, 
Vexa__d when he spoke, yet still they heard him speak. 
Sharp was his voice; which in the shrillest tone, 
Thus with injurious taunts attacka__d the throne. 
a_oeAmidst the glories of so bright a reign, 
What moves the great Atrides to complain? 
a__Tis thine whatea__er the warriora__s breast inflames, 
The golden spoil, and thine the lovely dames. 
With all the wealth our wars and blood bestow, 
Thy tents are crowded and thy chests oa__erflow. 
Thus at full ease in heaps of riches rolla__d, 
What grieves the monarch? Is it thirst of gold? 
Say, shall we march with our unconquera__d powers 
(The Greeks and I) to Iliona__s hostile towers, 
And bring the race of royal bastards here, 
For Troy to ransom at a price too dear? 
But safer plunder thy own host supplies; 
Say, wouldst thou seize some valiant leadera__s prize? 
Or, if thy heart to generous love be led, 
Some captive fair, to bless thy kingly bed? 
Whatea__er our master craves submit we must, 
Plagued with his pride, or punisha__d for his lust. 
Oh women of Achaia; men no more! 
Hence let us fly, and let him waste his store 
In loves and pleasures on the Phrygian shore. 
We may be wanted on some busy day, 
[pg 033] 
When Hector comes: so great Achilles may: 
From him he forced the prize we jointly gave, 
From him, the fierce, the fearless, and the brave: 
And durst he, as he ought, resent that wrong, 
This mighty tyrant were no tyrant long.a__ 
Fierce from his seat at this Ulysses springs,87 
In generous vengeance of the king of kings. 
With indignation sparkling in his eyes, 
He views the wretch, and sternly thus replies: 
a_oePeace, factious monster, born to vex the state, 
With wrangling talents forma__d for foul debate: 
Curb that impetuous tongue, nor rashly vain, 
And singly mad, asperse the sovereign reign. 
Have we not known thee, slave! of all our host, 
The man who acts the least, upbraids the most? 
Think not the Greeks to shameful flight to bring, 
Nor let those lips profane the name of king. 
For our return we trust the heavenly powers; 
Be that their care; to fight like men be ours. 
But grant the host with wealth the general load, 
Except detraction, what hast thou bestowa__d? 
Suppose some hero should his spoils resign, 
Art thou that hero, could those spoils be thine? 
Gods! let me perish on this hateful shore, 
And let these eyes behold my son no more; 
If, on thy next offence, this hand forbear 
To strip those arms thou ill deserva__st to wear, 
Expel the council where our princes meet, 
And send thee scourged and howling through the fleet.a__ 
He said, and cowering as the dastard bends, 
The weighty sceptre on his bank descends.88 
[pg 034] 
On the round bunch the bloody tumours rise: 
The tears spring starting from his haggard eyes; 
Trembling he sat, and shrunk in abject fears, 
From his vile visage wiped the scalding tears; 
While to his neighbour each expressa__d his thought: 
a_oeYe gods! what wonders has Ulysses wrought! 
What fruits his conduct and his courage yield! 
Great in the council, glorious in the field. 
Generous he rises in the crowna__s defence, 
To curb the factious tongue of insolence, 
Such just examples on offenders shown, 
Sedition silence, and assert the throne.a__ 
a__Twas thus the general voice the hero praised, 
Who, rising, high the imperial sceptre raised: 
The blue-eyed Pallas, his celestial friend, 
(In form a herald,) bade the crowds attend. 
The expecting crowds in still attention hung, 
To hear the wisdom of his heavenly tongue. 
Then deeply thoughtful, pausing ere he spoke, 
His silence thus the prudent hero broke: 
a_oeUnhappy monarch! whom the Grecian race 
With shame deserting, heap with vile disgrace. 
Not such at Argos was their generous vow: 
Once all their voice, but ah! forgotten now: 
Nea__er to return, was then the common cry, 
Till Troya__s proud structures should in ashes lie. 
Behold them weeping for their native shore; 
What could their wives or helpless children more? 
What heart but melts to leave the tender train, 
And, one short month, endure the wintry main? 
Few leagues removed, we wish our peaceful seat, 
When the ship tosses, and the tempests beat: 
Then well may this long stay provoke their tears, 
The tedious length of nine revolving years. 
Not for their grief the Grecian host I blame; 
But vanquisha__d! baffled! oh, eternal shame! 
Expect the time to Troya__s destruction given. 
And try the faith of Chalcas and of heaven. 
What passa__d at Aulis, Greece can witness bear,89 
And all who live to breathe this Phrygian air. 
Beside a fountaina__s sacred brink we raised 
Our verdant altars, and the victims blazed: 
a__Twas where the plane-tree spread its shades around, 
The altars heaved; and from the crumbling ground 
A mighty dragon shot, of dire portent; 
From Jove himself the dreadful sign was sent. 
[pg 035] 
Straight to the tree his sanguine spires he rolla__d, 
And curla__d around in many a winding fold; 
The topmost branch a mother-bird possessa__d; 
Eight callow infants filla__d the mossy nest; 
Herself the ninth; the serpent, as he hung, 
Stretcha__d his black jaws and crusha__d the crying young; 
While hovering near, with miserable moan, 
The drooping mother waila__d her children gone. 
The mother last, as round the nest she flew, 
Seized by the beating wing, the monster slew; 
Nor long survived: to marble turna__d, he stands 
A lasting prodigy on Aulisa__ sands. 
Such was the will of Jove; and hence we dare 
Trust in his omen, and support the war. 
For while around we gazed with wondering eyes, 
And trembling sought the powers with sacrifice, 
Full of his god, the reverend Chalcas cried,90 
a__Ye Grecian warriors! lay your fears aside. 
This wondrous signal Jove himself displays, 
Of long, long labours, but eternal praise. 
As many birds as by the snake were slain, 
So many years the toils of Greece remain; 
But wait the tenth, for Iliona__s fall decreed:a__ 
Thus spoke the prophet, thus the Fates succeed. 
Obey, ye Grecians! with submission wait, 
Nor let your flight avert the Trojan fate.a__ 
He said: the shores with loud applauses sound, 
The hollow ships each deafening shout rebound. 
Then Nestor thusa_"a_oeThese vain debates forbear, 
Ye talk like children, not like heroes dare. 
Where now are all your high resolves at last? 
Your leagues concluded, your engagements past? 
Vowa__d with libations and with victims then, 
Now vanisha__d like their smoke: the faith of men! 
While useless words consume the unactive hours, 
No wonder Troy so long resists our powers. 
Rise, great Atrides! and with courage sway; 
We march to war, if thou direct the way. 
But leave the few that dare resist thy laws, 
The mean deserters of the Grecian cause, 
To grudge the conquests mighty Jove prepares, 
And view with envy our successful wars. 
On that great day, when first the martial train, 
Big with the fate of Ilion, plougha__d the main, 
Jove, on the right, a prosperous signal sent, 
And thunder rolling shook the firmament. 
Encouraged hence, maintain the glorious strife, 
Till every soldier grasp a Phrygian wife, 
[pg 036] 
Till Helena__s woes at full revenged appear, 
And Troya__s proud matrons render tear for tear. 
Before that day, if any Greek invite 
His countrya__s troops to base, inglorious flight, 
Stand forth that Greek! and hoist his sail to fly, 
And die the dastard first, who dreads to die. 
But now, O monarch! all thy chiefs advise:91 
Nor what they offer, thou thyself despise. 
Among those counsels, let not mine be vain; 
In tribes and nations to divide thy train: 
His separate troops let every leader call, 
Each strengthen each, and all encourage all. 
What chief, or soldier, of the numerous band, 
Or bravely fights, or ill obeys command, 
When thus distinct they war, shall soon be known 
And what the cause of Ilion not oa__erthrown; 
If fate resists, or if our arms are slow, 
If gods above prevent, or men below.a__ 
To him the king: a_oeHow much thy years excel 
In arts of counsel, and in speaking well! 
O would the gods, in love to Greece, decree 
But ten such sages as they grant in thee; 
Such wisdom soon should Priama__s force destroy, 
And soon should fall the haughty towers of Troy! 
But Jove forbids, who plunges those he hates 
In fierce contention and in vain debates: 
Now great Achilles from our aid withdraws, 
By me provoked; a captive maid the cause: 
If ea__er as friends we join, the Trojan wall 
Must shake, and heavy will the vengeance fall! 
But now, ye warriors, take a short repast; 
And, well refresha__d, to bloody conflict haste. 
His sharpena__d spear let every Grecian wield, 
And every Grecian fix his brazen shield, 
Let all excite the fiery steeds of war, 
And all for combat fit the rattling car. 
This day, this dreadful day, let each contend; 
No rest, no respite, till the shades descend; 
Till darkness, or till death, shall cover all: 
Let the war bleed, and let the mighty fall; 
Till bathed in sweat be every manly breast, 
With the huge shield each brawny arm depressa__d, 
Each aching nerve refuse the lance to throw, 
And each spent courser at the chariot blow. 
Who dares, inglorious, in his ships to stay, 
Who dares to tremble on this signal day; 
That wretch, too mean to fall by martial power, 
The birds shall mangle, and the dogs devour.a__ 
[pg 037] 
The monarch spoke; and straight a murmur rose, 
Loud as the surges when the tempest blows, 
That dasha__d on broken rocks tumultuous roar, 
And foam and thunder on the stony shore. 
Straight to the tents the troops dispersing bend, 
The fires are kindled, and the smokes ascend; 
With hasty feasts they sacrifice, and pray, 
To avert the dangers of the doubtful day. 
A steer of five yearsa__ age, large limba__d, and fed,92 
To Jovea__s high altars Agamemnon led: 
There bade the noblest of the Grecian peers; 
And Nestor first, as most advanced in years. 
Next came Idomeneus,93 
and Tydeusa__ son,94 
Ajax the less, and Ajax Telamon;95 
Then wise Ulysses in his rank was placed; 
And Menelaus came, unbid, the last.96 
The chiefs surround the destined beast, and take 
The sacred offering of the salted cake: 
When thus the king prefers his solemn prayer; 
a_oeO thou! whose thunder rends the clouded air, 
Who in the heaven of heavens hast fixed thy throne, 
Supreme of gods! unbounded, and alone! 
Hear! and before the burning sun descends, 
Before the night her gloomy veil extends, 
Low in the dust be laid yon hostile spires, 
Be Priama__s palace sunk in Grecian fires. 
In Hectora__s breast be plunged this shining sword, 
And slaughtera__d heroes groan around their lord!a__ 
Thus prayed the chief: his unavailing prayer 
Great Jove refused, and tossa__d in empty air: 
The God averse, while yet the fumes arose, 
Prepared new toils, and doubled woes on woes. 
Their prayers performa__d the chiefs the rite pursue, 
The barley sprinkled, and the victim slew. 
[pg 038] 
The limbs they sever from the inclosing hide, 
The thighs, selected to the gods, divide. 
On these, in double cauls involved with art, 
The choicest morsels lie from every part, 
From the cleft wood the crackling flames aspire 
While the fat victims feed the sacred fire. 
The thighs thus sacrificed, and entrails dressa__d 
The assistants part, transfix, and roast the rest; 
Then spread the tables, the repast prepare, 
Each takes his seat, and each receives his share. 
Soon as the rage of hunger was suppressa__d, 
The generous Nestor thus the prince addressa__d. 
a_oeNow bid thy heralds sound the loud alarms, 
And call the squadrons sheathed in brazen arms; 
Now seize the occasion, now the troops survey, 
And lead to war when heaven directs the way.a__ 
He said; the monarch issued his commands; 
Straight the loud heralds call the gathering bands 
The chiefs inclose their king; the hosts divide, 
In tribes and nations ranka__d on either side. 
High in the midst the blue-eyed virgin flies; 
From rank to rank she darts her ardent eyes; 
The dreadful aegis, Jovea__s immortal shield, 
Blazed on her arm, and lightena__d all the field: 
Round the vast orb a hundred serpents rolla__d, 
Forma__d the bright fringe, and seema__d to burn in gold, 
With this each Greciana__s manly breast she warms, 
Swells their bold hearts, and strings their nervous arms, 
No more they sigh, inglorious, to return, 
But breathe revenge, and for the combat burn. 
As on some mountain, through the lofty grove, 
The crackling flames ascend, and blaze above; 
The fires expanding, as the winds arise, 
Shoot their long beams, and kindle half the skies: 
So from the polisha__d arms, and brazen shields, 
A gleamy splendour flasha__d along the fields. 
Not less their number than the embodied cranes, 
Or milk-white swans in Asiusa__ watery plains. 
That, oa__er the windings of Caystera__s springs,97 
Stretch their long necks, and clap their rustling wings, 
Now tower aloft, and course in airy rounds, 
Now light with noise; with noise the field resounds. 
Thus numerous and confused, extending wide, 
The legions crowd Scamandera__s flowery side;98 
[pg 039] 
With rushing troops the plains are covera__d oa__er, 
And thundering footsteps shake the sounding shore. 
Along the rivera__s level meads they stand, 
Thick as in spring the flowers adorn the land, 
Or leaves the trees; or thick as insects play, 
The wandering nation of a summera__s day: 
That, drawn by milky steams, at evening hours, 
In gathera__d swarms surround the rural bowers; 
From pail to pail with busy murmur run 
The gilded legions, glittering in the sun. 
So thronga__d, so close, the Grecian squadrons stood 
In radiant arms, and thirst for Trojan blood. 
Each leader now his scattera__d force conjoins 
In close array, and forms the deepening lines. 
Not with more ease the skilful shepherd-swain 
Collects his flocks from thousands on the plain. 
The king of kings, majestically tall, 
Towers oa__er his armies, and outshines them all; 
Like some proud bull, that round the pastures leads 
His subject herds, the monarch of the meads, 
Great as the gods, the exalted chief was seen, 
His strength like Neptune, and like Mars his mien;99 
Jove oa__er his eyes celestial glories spread, 
And dawning conquest played around his head. 
Say, virgins, seated round the throne divine, 
All-knowing goddesses! immortal nine!100 
Since eartha__s wide regions, heavena__s umneasura__d height, 
And hella__s abyss, hide nothing from your sight, 
(We, wretched mortals! lost in doubts below, 
But guess by rumour, and but boast we know,) 
O say what heroes, fired by thirst of fame, 
Or urged by wrongs, to Troya__s destruction came. 
To count them all, demands a thousand tongues, 
A throat of brass, and adamantine lungs. 
Daughters of Jove, assist! inspired by you 
The mighty labour dauntless I pursue; 
[pg 040] 
What crowded armies, from what climes they bring, 
Their names, their numbers, and their chiefs I sing. 
THE CATALOGUE OF THE SHIPS.101 
Illustration: NEPTUNE. 
NEPTUNE. 
The hardy warriors whom Boeotia bred, 
Penelius, Leitus, Prothoenor, led: 
With these Arcesilaus and Clonius stand, 
Equal in arms, and equal in command. 
These head the troops that rocky Aulis yields, 
And Eteona__s hills, and Hyriea__s watery fields, 
And Schoenos, Scholos, Graea near the main, 
And Mycalessiaa__s ample piny plain; 
Those who in Peteon or Ilesion dwell, 
Or Harma where Apolloa__s prophet fell; 
Heleon and Hyle, which the springs oa__erflow; 
And Medeon lofty, and Ocalea low; 
Or in the meads of Haliartus stray, 
Or Thespia sacred to the god of day: 
Onchestus, Neptunea__s celebrated groves; 
Copae, and Thisbe, famed for silver doves; 
[pg 041] 
For flocks Erythrae, Glissa for the vine; 
Platea green, and Nysa the divine; 
And they whom Thebea__s well-built walls inclose, 
Where Myde, Eutresis, Corone, rose; 
And Arne rich, with purple harvests crowna__d; 
And Anthedon, Boeotiaa__s utmost bound. 
Full fifty ships they send, and each conveys 
Twice sixty warriors through the foaming seas.102 
To these succeed Aspledona__s martial train, 
Who plough the spacious Orchomenian plain. 
Two valiant brothers rule the undaunted throng, 
Ialmen and Ascalaphus the strong: 
Sons of Astyoche, the heavenly fair, 
Whose virgin charms subdued the god of war: 
(In Actora__s court as she retired to rest, 
The strength of Mars the blushing maid compressa__d) 
Their troops in thirty sable vessels sweep, 
With equal oars, the hoarse-resounding deep. 
The Phocians next in forty barks repair; 
Epistrophus and Schedius head the war: 
From those rich regions where Cephisus leads 
His silver current through the flowery meads; 
From Panopea, Chrysa the divine, 
Where Anemoriaa__s stately turrets shine, 
Where Pytho, Daulis, Cyparissus stood, 
And fair Lilaea views the rising flood. 
These, ranged in order on the floating tide, 
Close, on the left, the bold Boeotiansa__ side. 
Fierce Ajax led the Locrian squadrons on, 
Ajax the less, Oileusa__ valiant son; 
Skilla__d to direct the flying dart aright; 
Swift in pursuit, and active in the fight. 
Him, as their chief, the chosen troops attend, 
Which Bessa, Thronus, and rich Cynos send; 
Opus, Calliarus, and Scarphea__s bands; 
And those who dwell where pleasing Augia stands, 
And where Boagrius floats the lowly lands, 
Or in fair Tarphea__s sylvan seats reside: 
In forty vessels cut the yielding tide. 
[pg 042] 
Euboea next her martial sons prepares, 
And sends the brave Abantes to the wars: 
Breathing revenge, in arms they take their way 
From Chalcisa__ walls, and strong Eretria; 
The Isteian fields for generous vines renowna__d, 
The fair Caristos, and the Styrian ground; 
Where Dios from her towers oa__erlooks the plain, 
And high Cerinthus views the neighbouring main. 
Down their broad shoulders falls a length of hair; 
Their hands dismiss not the long lance in air; 
But with protended spears in fighting fields 
Pierce the tough corslets and the brazen shields. 
Twice twenty ships transport the warlike bands, 
Which bold Elphenor, fierce in arms, commands. 
Full fifty more from Athens stem the main, 
Led by Menestheus through the liquid plain. 
(Athens the fair, where great Erectheus swaya__d, 
That owed his nurture to the blue-eyed maid, 
But from the teeming furrow took his birth, 
The mighty offspring of the foodful earth. 
Him Pallas placed amidst her wealthy fane, 
Adored with sacrifice and oxen slain; 
Where, as the years revolve, her altars blaze, 
And all the tribes resound the goddessa__ praise.) 
No chief like thee, Menestheus! Greece could yield, 
To marshal armies in the dusty field, 
The extended wings of battle to display, 
Or close the embodied host in firm array. 
Nestor alone, improved by length of days, 
For martial conduct bore an equal praise. 
With these appear the Salaminian bands, 
Whom the gigantic Telamon commands; 
In twelve black ships to Troy they steer their course, 
And with the great Athenians join their force. 
Next move to war the generous Argive train, 
From high Troezene, and Masetaa__s plain, 
And fair A_gina circled by the main: 
Whom strong Tyrinthea__s lofty walls surround, 
And Epidaure with viny harvests crowna__d: 
And where fair Asinen and Hermoin show 
Their cliffs above, and ample bay below. 
These by the brave Euryalus were led, 
Great Sthenelus, and greater Diomed; 
But chief Tydides bore the sovereign sway: 
In fourscore barks they plough the watery way. 
The proud Mycene arms her martial powers, 
Cleone, Corinth, with imperial towers,103 
[pg 043] 
Fair Araethyrea, Orniaa__s fruitful plain, 
And A_gion, and Adrastusa__ ancient reign; 
And those who dwell along the sandy shore, 
And where Pellene yields her fleecy store, 
Where Helice and Hyperesia lie, 
And Gonoessaa__s spires salute the sky. 
Great Agamemnon rules the numerous band, 
A hundred vessels in long order stand, 
And crowded nations wait his dread command. 
High on the deck the king of men appears, 
And his refulgent arms in triumph wears; 
Proud of his host, unrivalla__d in his reign, 
In silent pomp he moves along the main. 
His brother follows, and to vengeance warms 
The hardy Spartans, exercised in arms: 
Phares and Brysiaa__s valiant troops, and those 
Whom Lacedaemona__s lofty hills inclose; 
Or Messea__s towers for silver doves renowna__d, 
Amyclae, Laas, Augiaa__s happy ground, 
And those whom OEtylosa__ low walls contain, 
And Helos, on the margin of the main: 
These, oa__er the bending ocean, Helena__s cause, 
In sixty ships with Menelaus draws: 
Eager and loud from man to man he flies, 
Revenge and fury flaming in his eyes; 
While vainly fond, in fancy oft he hears 
The fair onea__s grief, and sees her falling tears. 
In ninety sail, from Pylosa__ sandy coast, 
Nestor the sage conducts his chosen host: 
From Amphigeniaa__s ever-fruitful land, 
Where A_py high, and little Pteleon stand; 
Where beauteous Arene her structures shows, 
And Thryona__s walls Alpheusa__ streams inclose: 
And Dorion, famed for Thamyrisa__ disgrace, 
Superior once of all the tuneful race, 
Till, vain of mortalsa__ empty praise, he strove 
To match the seed of cloud-compelling Jove! 
Too daring bard! whose unsuccessful pride 
The immortal Muses in their art defied. 
The avenging Muses of the light of day 
Deprived his eyes, and snatcha__d his voice away; 
No more his heavenly voice was heard to sing, 
His hand no more awaked the silver string. 
Where under high Cyllene, crowna__d with wood, 
The shaded tomb of old A_pytus stood; 
From Ripe, Stratie, Tegeaa__s bordering towns, 
The Phenean fields, and Orchomenian downs, 
Where the fat herds in plenteous pasture rove; 
And Stymphelus with her surrounding grove; 
Parrhasia, on her snowy cliffs reclined, 
[pg 044] 
And high Enispe shook by wintry wind, 
And fair Mantineaa__s ever-pleasing site; 
In sixty sail the Arcadian bands unite. 
Bold Agapenor, glorious at their head, 
(Ancaeusa__ son) the mighty squadron led. 
Their ships, supplied by Agamemnona__s care, 
Through roaring seas the wondering warriors bear; 
The first to battle on the appointed plain, 
But new to all the dangers of the main. 
Those, where fair Elis and Buprasium join; 
Whom Hyrmin, here, and Myrsinus confine, 
And bounded there, where oa__er the valleys rose 
The Olenian rock; and where Alisium flows; 
Beneath four chiefs (a numerous army) came: 
The strength and glory of the Epean name. 
In separate squadrons these their train divide, 
Each leads ten vessels through the yielding tide. 
One was Amphimachus, and Thalpius one; 
(Eurytusa__ this, and that Teatusa__ son;) 
Diores sprung from Amarynceusa__ line; 
And great Polyxenus, of force divine. 
But those who view fair Elis oa__er the seas 
From the blest islands of the Echinades, 
In forty vessels under Meges move, 
Begot by Phyleus, the beloved of Jove: 
To strong Dulichium from his sire he fled, 
And thence to Troy his hardy warriors led. 
Ulysses followa__d through the watery road, 
A chief, in wisdom equal to a god. 
With those whom Cephaleniaa__s line inclosed, 
Or till their fields along the coast opposed; 
Or where fair Ithaca oa__erlooks the floods, 
Where high Neritos shakes his waving woods, 
Where A_gilipaa__s rugged sides are seen, 
Crocylia rocky, and Zacynthus green. 
These in twelve galleys with vermilion prores, 
Beneath his conduct sought the Phrygian shores. 
Thoas came next, Andraemona__s valiant son, 
From Pleurona__s walls, and chalky Calydon, 
And rough Pylene, and the Olenian steep, 
And Chalcis, beaten by the rolling deep. 
He led the warriors from the A_tolian shore, 
For now the sons of OEneus were no more! 
The glories of the mighty race were fled! 
OEneus himself, and Meleager dead! 
To Thoasa__ care now trust the martial train, 
His forty vessels follow through the main. 
Next, eighty barks the Cretan king commands, 
Of Gnossus, Lyctus, and Gortynaa__s bands; 
And those who dwell where Rhytiona__s domes arise, 
[pg 045] 
Or white Lycastus glitters to the skies, 
Or where by Phaestus silver Jardan runs; 
Cretea__s hundred cities pour forth all her sons. 
These marcha__d, Idomeneus, beneath thy care, 
And Merion, dreadful as the god of war. 
Tlepolemus, the sun of Hercules, 
Led nine swift vessels through the foamy seas, 
From Rhodes, with everlasting sunshine bright, 
Jalyssus, Lindus, and Camirus white. 
His captive mother fierce Alcides bore 
From Ephyra__s walls and Sellea__s winding shore, 
Where mighty towns in ruins spread the plain, 
And saw their blooming warriors early slain. 
The hero, when to manly years he grew, 
Alcidesa__ uncle, old Licymnius, slew; 
For this, constraina__d to quit his native place, 
And shun the vengeance of the Herculean race, 
A fleet he built, and with a numerous train 
Of willing exiles wandera__d oa__er the main; 
Where, many seas and many sufferings past, 
On happy Rhodes the chief arrived at last: 
There in three tribes divides his native band, 
And rules them peaceful in a foreign land; 
Increased and prospera__d in their new abodes 
By mighty Jove, the sire of men and gods; 
With joy they saw the growing empire rise, 
And showers of wealth descending from the skies. 
Three ships with Nireus sought the Trojan shore, 
Nireus, whom Aglae to Charopus bore, 
Nireus, in faultless shape and blooming grace, 
The loveliest youth of all the Grecian race;104 
Pelides only matcha__d his early charms; 
But few his troops, and small his strength in arms. 
Next thirty galleys cleave the liquid plain, 
Of those Calydnaea__s sea-girt isles contain; 
With them the youth of Nisyrus repair, 
Casus the strong, and Crapathus the fair; 
Cos, where Eurypylus possessa__d the sway, 
Till great Alcides made the realms obey: 
These Antiphus and bold Phidippus bring, 
Sprung from the god by Thessalus the king. 
Now, Muse, recount Pelasgic Argosa__ powers, 
From Alos, Alope, and Trechina__s towers: 
From Phthiaa__s spacious vales; and Hella, blessa__d 
With female beauty far beyond the rest. 
Full fifty ships beneath Achillesa__ care, 
The Achaians, Myrmidons, Hellenians bear; 
Thessalians all, though various in their name; 
[pg 046] 
The same their nation, and their chief the same. 
But now inglorious, stretcha__d along the shore, 
They hear the brazen voice of war no more; 
No more the foe they face in dire array: 
Close in his fleet the angry leader lay; 
Since fair Briseis from his arms was torn, 
The noblest spoil from sacka__d Lyrnessus borne, 
Then, when the chief the Theban walls oa__erthrew, 
And the bold sons of great Evenus slew. 
There mourna__d Achilles, plunged in depth of care, 
But soon to rise in slaughter, blood, and war. 
To these the youth of Phylace succeed, 
Itona, famous for her fleecy breed, 
And grassy Pteleon decka__d with cheerful greens, 
The bowers of Ceres, and the sylvan scenes. 
Sweet Pyrrhasus, with blooming flowerets crowna__d, 
And Antrona__s watery dens, and caverna__d ground. 
These owna__d, as chief, Protesilas the brave, 
Who now lay silent in the gloomy grave: 
The first who boldly toucha__d the Trojan shore, 
And dyed a Phrygian lance with Grecian gore; 
There lies, far distant from his native plain; 
Unfinisha__d his proud palaces remain, 
And his sad consort beats her breast in vain. 
His troops in forty ships Podarces led, 
Iphiclusa__ son, and brother to the dead; 
Nor he unworthy to command the host; 
Yet still they mourna__d their ancient leader lost. 
The men who Glaphyraa__s fair soil partake, 
Where hills incircle Boebea__s lowly lake, 
Where Phaere hears the neighbouring waters fall, 
Or proud Iolcus lifts her airy wall, 
In ten black ships embarka__d for Iliona__s shore, 
With bold Eumelus, whom Alceste bore: 
All Peliasa__ race Alceste far outshined, 
The grace and glory of the beauteous kind, 
The troops Methone or Thaumacia yields, 
Olizona__s rocks, or Meliboeaa__s fields, 
With Philoctetes saila__d whose matchless art 
From the tough bow directs the feathera__d dart. 
Seven were his ships; each vessel fifty row, 
Skilla__d in his science of the dart and bow. 
But he lay raging on the Lemnian ground, 
A poisonous hydra gave the burning wound; 
There groana__d the chief in agonizing pain, 
Whom Greece at length shall wish, nor wish in vain. 
His forces Medon led from Lemnosa__ shore, 
Oileusa__ son, whom beauteous Rhena bore. 
The A'chalian race, in those high towers containa__d 
Where once Eurytus in proud triumph reigna__d, 
[pg 047] 
Or where her humbler turrets Tricca rears, 
Or where Ithome, rough with rocks, appears, 
In thirty sail the sparkling waves divide, 
Which Podalirius and Machaon guide. 
To these his skill their parent-god imparts, 
Divine professors of the healing arts. 
The bold Ormenian and Asterian bands 
In forty barks Eurypylus commands. 
Where Titan hides his hoary head in snow, 
And where Hyperiaa__s silver fountains flow. 
Thy troops, Argissa, Polypoetes leads, 
And Eleon, sheltera__d by Olympusa__ shades, 
Gyrtonea__s warriors; and where Orthe lies, 
And Oloossona__s chalky cliffs arise. 
Sprung from Pirithous of immortal race, 
The fruit of fair Hippodamea__s embrace, 
(That day, when hurla__d from Peliona__s cloudy head, 
To distant dens the shaggy Centaurs fled) 
With Polypoetes joina__d in equal sway 
Leonteus leads, and forty ships obey. 
In twenty sail the bold Perrhaebians came 
From Cyphus, Guneus was their leadera__s name. 
With these the Enians joina__d, and those who freeze 
Where cold Dodona lifts her holy trees; 
Or where the pleasing Titaresius glides, 
And into Peneus rolls his easy tides; 
Yet oa__er the silvery surface pure they flow, 
The sacred stream unmixa__d with streams below, 
Sacred and awful! from the dark abodes 
Styx pours them forth, the dreadful oath of gods! 
Last, under Prothous the Magnesians stood, 
(Prothous the swift, of old Tenthredona__s blood;) 
Who dwell where Pelion, crowna__d with piny boughs, 
Obscures the glade, and nods his shaggy brows; 
Or where through flowery Tempe Peneus straya__d: 
(The region stretcha__d beneath his mighty shade:) 
In forty sable barks they stemma__d the main; 
Such were the chiefs, and such the Grecian train. 
Say next, O Muse! of all Achaia breeds, 
Who bravest fought, or reina__d the noblest steeds? 
Eumelusa__ mares were foremost in the chase, 
As eagles fleet, and of Pheretian race; 
Bred where Pieriaa__s fruitful fountains flow, 
And traina__d by him who bears the silver bow. 
Fierce in the fight their nostrils breathed a flame, 
Their height, their colour, and their age the same; 
Oa__er fields of death they whirl the rapid car, 
And break the ranks, and thunder through the war. 
Ajax in arms the first renown acquired, 
While stern Achilles in his wrath retired: 
[pg 048] 
(His was the strength that mortal might exceeds, 
And his the unrivalla__d race of heavenly steeds:) 
But Thetisa__ son now shines in arms no more; 
His troops, neglected on the sandy shore. 
In empty air their sportive javelins throw, 
Or whirl the disk, or bend an idle bow: 
Unstaina__d with blood his covera__d chariots stand; 
The immortal coursers graze along the strand; 
But the brave chiefs the inglorious life deplored, 
And, wandering oa__er the camp, required their lord. 
Now, like a deluge, covering all around, 
The shining armies sweep along the ground; 
Swift as a flood of fire, when storms arise, 
Floats the wild field, and blazes to the skies. 
Earth groana__d beneath them; as when angry Jove 
Hurls down the forky lightning from above, 
On Arime when he the thunder throws, 
And fires Typhoeus with redoubled blows, 
Where Typhon, pressa__d beneath the burning load, 
Still feels the fury of the avenging god. 
But various Iris, Jovea__s commands to bear, 
Speeds on the wings of winds through liquid air; 
In Priama__s porch the Trojan chiefs she found, 
The old consulting, and the youths around. 
Politesa__ shape, the monarcha__s son, she chose, 
Who from A_setesa__ tomb observed the foes,105 
High on the mound; from whence in prospect lay 
The fields, the tents, the navy, and the bay. 
In this dissembled form, she hastes to bring 
The unwelcome message to the Phrygian king. 
a_oeCease to consult, the time for action calls; 
War, horrid war, approaches to your walls! 
Assembled armies oft have I beheld; 
But nea__er till now such numbers charged a field: 
Thick as autumnal leaves or driving sand, 
The moving squadrons blacken all the strand. 
Thou, godlike Hector! all thy force employ, 
Assemble all the united bands of Troy; 
In just array let every leader call 
The foreign troops: this day demands them all!a__ 
The voice divine the mighty chief alarms; 
The council breaks, the warriors rush to arms. 
The gates unfolding pour forth all their train, 
Nations on nations fill the dusky plain, 
Men, steeds, and chariots, shake the trembling ground: 
The tumult thickens, and the skies resound. 
Amidst the plain, in sight of Ilion, stands 
[pg 049] 
A rising mount, the work of human hands; 
(This for Myrinnea__s tomb the immortals know, 
Though calla__d Bateia in the world below;) 
Beneath their chiefs in martial order here, 
The auxiliar troops and Trojan hosts appear. 
The godlike Hector, high above the rest, 
Shakes his huge spear, and nods his plumy crest: 
In throngs around his native bands repair, 
And groves of lances glitter in the air. 
Divine A_neas brings the Dardan race, 
Anchisesa__ son, by Venusa__ stolen embrace, 
Born in the shades of Idaa__s secret grove; 
(A mortal mixing with the queen of love;) 
Archilochus and Acamas divide 
The warriora__s toils, and combat by his side. 
Who fair Zeleiaa__s wealthy valleys till,106 
Fast by the foot of Idaa__s sacred hill, 
Or drink, A_sepus, of thy sable flood, 
Were led by Pandarus, of royal blood; 
To whom his art Apollo deigna__d to show, 
Graced with the presents of his shafts and bow. 
From rich Apaesus and Adrestiaa__s towers, 
High Tereea__s summits, and Pityeaa__s bowers; 
From these the congregated troops obey 
Young Amphius and Adrastusa__ equal sway; 
Old Meropsa__ sons; whom, skilla__d in fates to come, 
The sire forewarna__d, and prophesied their doom: 
Fate urged them on! the sire forewarna__d in vain, 
They rusha__d to war, and perisha__d on the plain. 
From Practiusa__ stream, Percotea__s pasture lands, 
And Sestos and Abydosa__ neighbouring strands, 
From great Arisbaa__s walls and Sellea__s coast, 
Asius Hyrtacides conducts his host: 
High on his car he shakes the flowing reins, 
His fiery coursers thunder oa__er the plains. 
The fierce Pelasgi next, in war renowna__d, 
March from Larissaa__s ever-fertile ground: 
In equal arms their brother leaders shine, 
Hippothous bold, and Pyleus the divine. 
Next Acamas and Pyrous lead their hosts, 
In dread array, from Thraciaa__s wintry coasts; 
Round the bleak realms where Hellespontus roars, 
And Boreas beats the hoarse-resounding shores. 
With great Euphemus the Ciconians move, 
Sprung from Troezenian Ceus, loved by Jove. 
Pyraechmes the Paeonian troops attend, 
Skilla__d in the fight their crooked bows to bend; 
From Axiusa__ ample bed he leads them on, 
[pg 050] 
Axius, that laves the distant Amydon, 
Axius, that swells with all his neighbouring rills, 
And wide around the floating region fills. 
The Paphlagonians Pylaemenes rules, 
Where rich Henetia breeds her savage mules, 
Where Erythinusa__ rising cliffs are seen, 
Thy groves of box, Cytorus! ever green, 
And where A_gialus and Cromna lie, 
And lofty Sesamus invades the sky, 
And where Parthenius, rolla__d through banks of flowers, 
Reflects her bordering palaces and bowers. 
Here marcha__d in arms the Halizonian band, 
Whom Odius and Epistrophus command, 
From those far regions where the sun refines 
The ripening silver in Alybean mines. 
There mighty Chromis led the Mysian train, 
And augur Ennomus, inspired in vain; 
For stern Achilles loppa__d his sacred head, 
Rolla__d down Scamander with the vulgar dead. 
Phorcys and brave Ascanius here unite 
The Ascanian Phrygians, eager for the fight. 
Of those who round Maeoniaa__s realms reside, 
Or whom the vales in shades of Tmolus hide, 
Mestles and Antiphus the charge partake, 
Born on the banks of Gygesa__ silent lake. 
There, from the fields where wild Maeander flows, 
High Mycale, and Latmosa__ shady brows, 
And proud Miletus, came the Carian throngs, 
With mingled clamours and with barbarous tongues.107 
Amphimachus and Naustes guide the train, 
Naustes the bold, Amphimachus the vain, 
Who, tricka__d with gold, and glittering on his car, 
Rode like a woman to the field of war. 
Fool that he was! by fierce Achilles slain, 
The river swept him to the briny main: 
There whelma__d with waves the gaudy warrior lies 
The valiant victor seized the golden prize. 
The forces last in fair array succeed, 
Which blameless Glaucus and Sarpedon lead 
The warlike bands that distant Lycia yields, 
Where gulfy Xanthus foams along the fields. 
[pg 051] 
BOOK III. 
ARGUMENT. 
THE DUEL OF MENELAUS AND PARIS. 
The armies being ready to engage, a single combat is agreed upon 
between Menelaus and Paris (by the intervention of Hector) for the 
determination of the war. Iris is sent to call Helen to behold the 
fight. She leads her to the walls of Troy, where Priam sat with his 
counsellers observing the Grecian leaders on the plain below, to whom 
Helen gives an account of the chief of them. The kings on either part 
take the solemn oath for the conditions of the combat. The duel ensues; 
wherein Paris being overcome, he is snatched away in a cloud by Venus, 
and transported to his apartment. She then calls Helen from the walls, 
and brings the lovers together. Agamemnon, on the part of the Grecians, 
demands the restoration of Helen, and the performance of the articles. 
The three-and-twentieth day still continues throughout this book. The 
scene is sometimes in the fields before Troy, and sometimes in Troy 
itself. 
Thus by their leadersa__ care each martial band 
Moves into ranks, and stretches oa__er the land. 
With shouts the Trojans, rushing from afar, 
Proclaim their motions, and provoke the war 
So when inclement winters vex the plain 
With piercing frosts, or thick-descending rain, 
To warmer seas the cranes embodied fly,108 
With noise, and order, through the midway sky; 
To pigmy nations wounds and death they bring, 
And all the war descends upon the wing, 
But silent, breathing rage, resolved and skilla__d109 
By mutual aids to fix a doubtful field, 
[pg 052] 
Swift march the Greeks: the rapid dust around 
Darkening arises from the laboura__d ground. 
Thus from his flaggy wings when Notus sheds 
A night of vapours round the mountain heads, 
Swift-gliding mists the dusky fields invade, 
To thieves more grateful than the midnight shade; 
While scarce the swains their feeding flocks survey, 
Lost and confused amidst the thickena__d day: 
So wrappa__d in gathering dust, the Grecian train, 
A moving cloud, swept on, and hid the plain. 
Now front to front the hostile armies stand, 
Eager of fight, and only wait command; 
When, to the van, before the sons of fame 
Whom Troy sent forth, the beauteous Paris came: 
In form a god! the panthera__s speckled hide 
Flowa__d oa__er his armour with an easy pride: 
His bended bow across his shoulders flung, 
His sword beside him negligently hung; 
Two pointed spears he shook with gallant grace, 
And dared the bravest of the Grecian race. 
As thus, with glorious air and proud disdain, 
He boldly stalka__d, the foremost on the plain, 
Him Menelaus, loved of Mars, espies, 
With heart elated, and with joyful eyes: 
So joys a lion, if the branching deer, 
Or mountain goat, his bulky prize, appear; 
Eager he seizes and devours the slain, 
Pressa__d by bold youths and baying dogs in vain. 
Thus fond of vengeance, with a furious bound, 
In clanging arms he leaps upon the ground 
From his high chariot: him, approaching near, 
The beauteous champion views with marks of fear, 
Smit with a conscious sense, retires behind, 
And shuns the fate he well deserved to find. 
As when some shepherd, from the rustling trees110 
Shot forth to view, a scaly serpent sees, 
Trembling and pale, he starts with wild affright 
And all confused precipitates his flight: 
So from the king the shining warrior flies, 
And plunged amid the thickest Trojans lies. 
As godlike Hector sees the prince retreat, 
He thus upbraids him with a generous heat: 
a_oeUnhappy Paris! but to women brave!111 
So fairly forma__d, and only to deceive! 
[pg 053] 
Oh, hadst thou died when first thou sawa__st the light, 
Or died at least before thy nuptial rite! 
A better fate than vainly thus to boast, 
And fly, the scandal of thy Trojan host. 
Gods! how the scornful Greeks exult to see 
Their fears of danger undeceived in thee! 
Thy figure promised with a martial air, 
But ill thy soul supplies a form so fair. 
In former days, in all thy gallant pride, 
When thy tall ships triumphant stemma__d the tide, 
When Greece beheld thy painted canvas flow, 
And crowds stood wondering at the passing show, 
Say, was it thus, with such a baffled mien, 
You met the approaches of the Spartan queen, 
Thus from her realm conveya__d the beauteous prize, 
And both her warlike lords outshined in Helena__s eyes? 
This deed, thy foesa__ delight, thy own disgrace, 
Thy fathera__s grief, and ruin of thy race; 
This deed recalls thee to the proffera__d fight; 
Or hast thou injured whom thou dara__st not right? 
Soon to thy cost the field would make thee know 
Thou keepa__st the consort of a braver foe. 
Thy graceful form instilling soft desire, 
Thy curling tresses, and thy silver lyre, 
Beauty and youth; in vain to these you trust, 
When youth and beauty shall be laid in dust: 
Troy yet may wake, and one avenging blow 
Crush the dire author of his countrya__s woe.a__ 
His silence here, with blushes, Paris breaks: 
a_oea__Tis just, my brother, what your anger speaks: 
But who like thee can boast a soul sedate, 
So firmly proof to all the shocks of fate? 
Thy force, like steel, a tempera__d hardness shows, 
Still edged to wound, and still untired with blows, 
Like steel, uplifted by some strenuous swain, 
With falling woods to strew the wasted plain. 
Thy gifts I praise; nor thou despise the charms 
With which a lover golden Venus arms; 
Soft moving speech, and pleasing outward show, 
No wish can gain them, but the gods bestow. 
Yet, woulda__st thou have the proffera__d combat stand, 
The Greeks and Trojans seat on either hand; 
Then let a midway space our hosts divide, 
And, on that stage of war, the cause be tried: 
By Paris there the Spartan king be fought, 
For beauteous Helen and the wealth she brought; 
And who his rival can in arms subdue, 
His be the fair, and his the treasure too. 
Thus with a lasting league your toils may cease, 
And Troy possess her fertile fields in peace; 
[pg 054] 
Thus may the Greeks review their native shore, 
Much famed for generous steeds, for beauty more.a__ 
He said. The challenge Hector heard with joy, 
Then with his spear restraina__d the youth of Troy, 
Held by the midst, athwart; and near the foe 
Advanced with steps majestically slow: 
While round his dauntless head the Grecians pour 
Their stones and arrows in a mingled shower. 
Then thus the monarch, great Atrides, cried: 
a_oeForbear, ye warriors! lay the darts aside: 
A parley Hector asks, a message bears; 
We know him by the various plume he wears.a__ 
Awed by his high command the Greeks attend, 
The tumult silence, and the fight suspend. 
While from the centre Hector rolls his eyes 
On either host, and thus to both applies: 
a_oeHear, all ye Trojan, all ye Grecian bands, 
What Paris, author of the war, demands. 
Your shining swords within the sheath restrain, 
And pitch your lances in the yielding plain. 
Here in the midst, in either armya__s sight, 
He dares the Spartan king to single fight; 
And wills that Helen and the ravisha__d spoil, 
That caused the contest, shall reward the toil. 
Let these the brave triumphant victor grace, 
And different nations part in leagues of peace.a__ 
He spoke: in still suspense on either side 
Each army stood: the Spartan chief replied: 
a_oeMe too, ye warriors, hear, whose fatal right 
A world engages in the toils of fight. 
To me the labour of the field resign; 
Me Paris injured; all the war be mine. 
Fall he that must, beneath his rivala__s arms; 
And live the rest, secure of future harms. 
Two lambs, devoted by your countrya__s rite, 
To earth a sable, to the sun a white, 
Prepare, ye Trojans! while a third we bring 
Select to Jove, the inviolable king. 
Let reverend Priam in the truce engage, 
And add the sanction of considerate age; 
His sons are faithless, headlong in debate, 
And youth itself an empty wavering state; 
Cool age advances, venerably wise, 
Turns on all hands its deep-discerning eyes; 
Sees what befell, and what may yet befall, 
Concludes from both, and best provides for all. 
The nations hear with rising hopes possessa__d, 
And peaceful prospects dawn in every breast. 
Within the lines they drew their steeds around, 
And from their chariots issued on the ground; 
[pg 055] 
Next, all unbuckling the rich mail they wore, 
Laid their bright arms along the sable shore. 
On either side the meeting hosts are seen 
With lances fixa__d, and close the space between. 
Two heralds now, despatcha__d to Troy, invite 
The Phrygian monarch to the peaceful rite. 
Talthybius hastens to the fleet, to bring 
The lamb for Jove, the inviolable king. 
Meantime to beauteous Helen, from the skies 
The various goddess of the rainbow flies: 
(Like fair Laodice in form and face, 
The loveliest nymph of Priama__s royal race:) 
Her in the palace, at her loom she found; 
The golden web her own sad story crowna__d, 
The Trojan wars she weaved (herself the prize) 
And the dire triumphs of her fatal eyes. 
To whom the goddess of the painted bow: 
a_oeApproach, and view the wondrous scene below!112 
Each hardy Greek, and valiant Trojan knight, 
So dreadful late, and furious for the fight, 
Now rest their spears, or lean upon their shields; 
Ceased is the war, and silent all the fields. 
Paris alone and Spartaa__s king advance, 
In single fight to toss the beamy lance; 
Each met in arms, the fate of combat tries, 
Thy love the motive, and thy charms the prize.a__ 
This said, the many-coloured maid inspires 
Her husbanda__s love, and wakes her former fires; 
Her country, parents, all that once were dear, 
Rush to her thought, and force a tender tear, 
Oa__er her fair face a snowy veil she threw, 
And, softly sighing, from the loom withdrew. 
Her handmaids, Clymene and A_thra, wait 
Her silent footsteps to the Scaean gate. 
There sat the seniors of the Trojan race: 
(Old Priama__s chiefs, and most in Priama__s grace,) 
The king the first; Thymoetes at his side; 
Lampus and Clytius, long in council tried; 
Panthus, and Hicetaon, once the strong; 
And next, the wisest of the reverend throng, 
Antenor grave, and sage Ucalegon, 
Leana__d on the walls and baska__d before the sun: 
Chiefs, who no more in bloody fights engage, 
But wise through time, and narrative with age, 
In summer days, like grasshoppers rejoice, 
A bloodless race, that send a feeble voice. 
[pg 056] 
These, when the Spartan queen approacha__d the tower, 
In secret owna__d resistless beautya__s power: 
They cried, a_oeNo wonder such celestial charms113 
For nine long years have set the world in arms; 
What winning graces! what majestic mien! 
She moves a goddess, and she looks a queen! 
Yet hence, O Heaven, convey that fatal face, 
And from destruction save the Trojan race.a__ 
The good old Priam welcomed her, and cried, 
a_oeApproach, my child, and grace thy fathera__s side. 
See on the plain thy Grecian spouse appears, 
The friends and kindred of thy former years. 
No crime of thine our present sufferings draws, 
Not thou, but Heavena__s disposing will, the cause 
The gods these armies and this force employ, 
The hostile gods conspire the fate of Troy. 
But lift thy eyes, and say, what Greek is he 
(Far as from hence these aged orbs can see) 
Around whose brow such martial graces shine, 
So tall, so awful, and almost divine! 
Though some of larger stature tread the green, 
None match his grandeur and exalted mien: 
He seems a monarch, and his countrya__s pride.a__ 
Thus ceased the king, and thus the fair replied: 
a_oeBefore thy presence, father, I appear, 
With conscious shame and reverential fear. 
Ah! had I died, ere to these walk I fled, 
False to my country, and my nuptial bed; 
My brothers, friends, and daughter left behind, 
False to them all, to Paris only kind! 
For this I mourn, till grief or dire disease 
Shall waste the form whose fault it was to please! 
The king of kings, Atrides, you survey, 
Great in the war, and great in arts of sway: 
My brother once, before my days of shame! 
And oh! that still he bore a brothera__s name!a__ 
With wonder Priam viewa__d the godlike man, 
Extolla__d the happy prince, and thus began: 
a_oeO blessa__d Atrides! born to prosperous fate, 
Successful monarch of a mighty state! 
How vast thy empire! Of your matchless train 
What numbers lost, what numbers yet remain! 
In Phrygia once were gallant armies known, 
In ancient time, when Otreus filla__d the throne, 
When godlike Mygdon led their troops of horse, 
And I, to join them, raised the Trojan force: 
Against the manlike Amazons we stood,114 
[pg 057] 
And Sangara__s stream ran purple with their blood. 
But far inferior those, in martial grace, 
And strength of numbers, to this Grecian race.a__ 
This said, once more he viewa__d the warrior train; 
a_oeWhata__s he, whose arms lie scattera__d on the plain? 
Broad is his breast, his shoulders larger spread, 
Though great Atrides overtops his head. 
Nor yet appear his care and conduct small; 
From rank to rank he moves, and orders all. 
The stately ram thus measures oa__er the ground, 
And, master of the flock, surveys them round.a__ 
Then Helen thus: a_oeWhom your discerning eyes 
Have singled out, is Ithacus the wise; 
A barren island boasts his glorious birth; 
His fame for wisdom fills the spacious earth.a__ 
Antenor took the word, and thus began:115 
a_oeMyself, O king! have seen that wondrous man 
When, trusting Jove and hospitable laws, 
To Troy he came, to plead the Grecian cause; 
(Great Menelaus urged the same request;) 
My house was honoura__d with each royal guest: 
I knew their persons, and admired their parts, 
Both brave in arms, and both approved in arts. 
Erect, the Spartan most engaged our view; 
Ulysses seated, greater reverence drew. 
When Atreusa__ son harangued the listening train, 
Just was his sense, and his expression plain, 
His words succinct, yet full, without a fault; 
He spoke no more than just the thing he ought. 
But when Ulysses rose, in thought profound,116 
His modest eyes he fixa__d upon the ground; 
As one unskilla__d or dumb, he seema__d to stand, 
[pg 058] 
Nor raised his head, nor stretcha__d his sceptred hand; 
But, when he speaks, what elocution flows! 
Soft as the fleeces of descending snows,117 
The copious accents fall, with easy art; 
Melting they fall, and sink into the heart! 
Wondering we hear, and fixa__d in deep surprise, 
Our ears refute the censure of our eyes.a__ 
The king then aska__d (as yet the camp he viewa__d) 
a_oeWhat chief is that, with giant strength endued, 
Whose brawny shoulders, and whose swelling chest, 
And lofty stature, far exceed the rest? 
a_oeAjax the great, (the beauteous queen replied,) 
Himself a host: the Grecian strength and pride. 
See! bold Idomeneus superior towers 
Amid yon circle of his Cretan powers, 
Great as a god! I saw him once before, 
With Menelaus on the Spartan shore. 
The rest I know, and could in order name; 
All valiant chiefs, and men of mighty fame. 
Yet two are wanting of the numerous train, 
Whom long my eyes have sought, but sought in vain: 
Castor and Pollux, first in martial force, 
One bold on foot, and one renowna__d for horse. 
My brothers these; the same our native shore, 
One house containa__d us, as one mother bore. 
Perhaps the chiefs, from warlike toils at ease, 
For distant Troy refused to sail the seas; 
Perhaps their swords some nobler quarrel draws, 
Ashamed to combat in their sistera__s cause.a__ 
So spoke the fair, nor knew her brothersa__ doom;118 
Wrapt in the cold embraces of the tomb; 
Adorna__d with honours in their native shore, 
Silent they slept, and heard of wars no more. 
Meantime the heralds, through the crowded town. 
Bring the rich wine and destined victims down. 
Idaeusa__ arms the golden goblets pressa__d,119 
Who thus the venerable king addressa__d: 
a_oeArise, O father of the Trojan state! 
The nations call, thy joyful people wait 
To seal the truce, and end the dire debate. 
Paris, thy son, and Spartaa__s king advance, 
In measured lists to toss the weighty lance; 
And who his rival shall in arms subdue, 
His be the dame, and his the treasure too. 
[pg 059] 
Thus with a lasting league our toils may cease, 
And Troy possess her fertile fields in peace: 
So shall the Greeks review their native shore, 
Much famed for generous steeds, for beauty more.a__ 
With grief he heard, and bade the chiefs prepare 
To join his milk-white coursers to the car; 
He mounts the seat, Antenor at his side; 
The gentle steeds through Scaeaa__s gates they guide:120 
Next from the car descending on the plain, 
Amid the Grecian host and Trojan train, 
Slow they proceed: the sage Ulysses then 
Arose, and with him rose the king of men. 
On either side a sacred herald stands, 
The wine they mix, and on each monarcha__s hands 
Pour the full urn; then draws the Grecian lord 
His cutlass sheathed beside his ponderous sword; 
From the signa__d victims crops the curling hair;121 
The heralds part it, and the princes share; 
Then loudly thus before the attentive bands 
He calls the gods, and spreads his lifted hands: 
a_oeO first and greatest power! whom all obey, 
Who high on Idaa__s holy mountain sway, 
Eternal Jove! and you bright orb that roll 
From east to west, and view from pole to pole! 
Thou mother Earth! and all ye living floods! 
Infernal furies, and Tartarean gods, 
Who rule the dead, and horrid woes prepare 
For perjured kings, and all who falsely swear! 
Hear, and be witness. If, by Paris slain, 
Great Menelaus press the fatal plain; 
The dame and treasures let the Trojan keep, 
And Greece returning plough the watery deep. 
If by my brothera__s lance the Trojan bleed, 
Be his the wealth and beauteous dame decreed: 
The appointed fine let Ilion justly pay, 
And every age record the signal day. 
This if the Phrygians shall refuse to yield, 
Arms must revenge, and Mars decide the field.a__ 
With that the chief the tender victims slew, 
And in the dust their bleeding bodies threw; 
The vital spirit issued at the wound, 
And left the members quivering on the ground. 
From the same urn they drink the mingled wine, 
And add libations to the powers divine. 
While thus their prayers united mount the sky, 
a_oeHear, mighty Jove! and hear, ye gods on high! 
And may their blood, who first the league confound, 
[pg 060] 
Shed like this wine, disdain the thirsty ground; 
May all their consorts serve promiscuous lust, 
And all their lust be scattera__d as the dust!a__ 
Thus either host their imprecations joina__d, 
Which Jove refused, and mingled with the wind. 
The rites now finisha__d, reverend Priam rose, 
And thus expressa__d a heart oa__ercharged with woes: 
a_oeYe Greeks and Trojans, let the chiefs engage, 
But spare the weakness of my feeble age: 
In yonder walls that object let me shun, 
Nor view the danger of so dear a son. 
Whose arms shall conquer and what prince shall fall, 
Heaven only knows; for heaven disposes all.a__ 
This said, the hoary king no longer staya__d, 
But on his car the slaughtera__d victims laid: 
Then seized the reins his gentle steeds to guide, 
And drove to Troy, Antenor at his side. 
Bold Hector and Ulysses now dispose 
The lists of combat, and the ground inclose: 
Next to decide, by sacred lots prepare, 
Who first shall launch his pointed spear in air. 
The people pray with elevated hands, 
And words like these are heard through all the bands: 
a_oeImmortal Jove, high Heavena__s superior lord, 
On lofty Idaa__s holy mount adored! 
Whoea__er involved us in this dire debate, 
O give that author of the war to fate 
And shades eternal! let division cease, 
And joyful nations join in leagues of peace.a__ 
With eyes averted Hector hastes to turn 
The lots of fight and shakes the brazen urn. 
Then, Paris, thine leapa__d forth; by fatal chance 
Ordaina__d the first to whirl the weighty lance. 
Both armies sat the combat to survey. 
Beside each chief his azure armour lay, 
And round the lists the generous coursers neigh. 
The beauteous warrior now arrays for fight, 
In gilded arms magnificently bright: 
The purple cuishes clasp his thighs around, 
With flowers adorna__d, with silver buckles bound: 
Lycaona__s corslet his fair body dressa__d, 
Braced in and fitted to his softer breast; 
A radiant baldric, oa__er his shoulder tied, 
Sustaina__d the sword that glittera__d at his side: 
His youthful face a polisha__d helm oa__erspread; 
The waving horse-hair nodded on his head: 
His figured shield, a shining orb, he takes, 
And in his hand a pointed javelin shakes. 
With equal speed and fired by equal charms, 
The Spartan hero sheathes his limbs in arms. 
[pg 061] 
Now round the lists the admiring armies stand, 
With javelins fixa__d, the Greek and Trojan band. 
Amidst the dreadful vale, the chiefs advance, 
All pale with rage, and shake the threatening lance. 
The Trojan first his shining javelin threw; 
Full on Atridesa__ ringing shield it flew, 
Nor pierced the brazen orb, but with a bound122 
Leapa__d from the buckler, blunted, on the ground. 
Atrides then his massy lance prepares, 
In act to throw, but first prefers his prayers: 
a_oeGive me, great Jove! to punish lawless lust, 
And lay the Trojan gasping in the dust: 
Destroy the aggressor, aid my righteous cause, 
Avenge the breach of hospitable laws! 
Let this example future times reclaim, 
And guard from wrong fair friendshipa__s holy name.a__ 
Be said, and poised in air the javelin sent, 
Through Parisa__ shield the forceful weapon went, 
His corslet pierces, and his garment rends, 
And glancing downward, near his flank descends. 
The wary Trojan, bending from the blow, 
Eludes the death, and disappoints his foe: 
But fierce Atrides waved his sword, and strook 
Full on his casque: the crested helmet shook; 
The brittle steel, unfaithful to his hand, 
Broke short: the fragments glittera__d on the sand. 
The raging warrior to the spacious skies 
Raised his upbraiding voice and angry eyes: 
a_oeThen is it vain in Jove himself to trust? 
And is it thus the gods assist the just? 
When crimes provoke us, Heaven success denies; 
The dart falls harmless, and the falchion flies.a__ 
Furious he said, and towards the Grecian crew 
(Seized by the crest) the unhappy warrior drew; 
Struggling he followed, while the embroidera__d thong 
That tied his helmet, dragga__d the chief along. 
Then had his ruin crowna__d Atridesa__ joy, 
But Venus trembled for the prince of Troy: 
Unseen she came, and burst the golden band; 
And left an empty helmet in his hand. 
The casque, enraged, amidst the Greeks he threw; 
The Greeks with smiles the polisha__d trophy view. 
Then, as once more he lifts the deadly dart, 
In thirst of vengeance, at his rivala__s heart; 
The queen of love her favoura__d champion shrouds 
[pg 062] 
(For gods can all things) in a veil of clouds. 
Raised from the field the panting youth she led, 
And gently laid him on the bridal bed, 
With pleasing sweets his fainting sense renews, 
And all the dome perfumes with heavenly dews. 
Meantime the brightest of the female kind, 
The matchless Helen, oa__er the walls reclined; 
To her, beset with Trojan beauties, came, 
In borrowa__d form, the laughter-loving dame. 
(She seema__d an ancient maid, well-skilla__d to cull 
The snowy fleece, and wind the twisted wool.) 
The goddess softly shook her silken vest, 
That shed perfumes, and whispering thus addressa__d: 
Illustration: VENUS, DISGUISED, INVITING HELEN TO THE CHAMBER OF PARIS. 
VENUS, DISGUISED, INVITING HELEN TO THE CHAMBER OF PARIS. 
a_oeHaste, happy nymph! for thee thy Paris calls, 
Safe from the fight, in yonder lofty walls, 
Fair as a god; with odours round him spread, 
He lies, and waits thee on the well-known bed; 
Not like a warrior parted from the foe, 
But some gay dancer in the public show.a__ 
She spoke, and Helena__s secret soul was moved; 
She scorna__d the champion, but the man she loved. 
Fair Venusa__ neck, her eyes that sparkled fire, 
And breast, reveala__d the queen of soft desire.123 
[pg 063] 
Struck with her presence, straight the lively red 
Forsook her cheek; and trembling, thus she said: 
a_oeThen is it still thy pleasure to deceive? 
And womana__s frailty always to believe! 
Say, to new nations must I cross the main, 
Or carry wars to some soft Asian plain? 
For whom must Helen break her second vow? 
What other Paris is thy darling now? 
Left to Atrides, (victor in the strife,) 
An odious conquest and a captive wife, 
Hence let me sail; and if thy Paris bear 
My absence ill, let Venus ease his care. 
A handmaid goddess at his side to wait, 
Renounce the glories of thy heavenly state, 
Be fixa__d for ever to the Trojan shore, 
His spouse, or slave; and mount the skies no more. 
For me, to lawless love no longer led, 
I scorn the coward, and detest his bed; 
Else should I merit everlasting shame, 
And keen reproach, from every Phrygian dame: 
Ill suits it now the joys of love to know, 
Too deep my anguish, and too wild my woe.a__ 
Illustration: VENUS PRESENTING HELEN TO PARIS. 
VENUS PRESENTING HELEN TO PARIS. 
Then thus incensed, the Paphian queen replies: 
a_oeObey the power from whom thy glories rise: 
Should Venus leave thee, every charm must fly, 
Fade from thy cheek, and languish in thy eye. 
Cease to provoke me, lest I make thee more 
The worlda__s aversion, than their love before; 
Now the bright prize for which mankind engage, 
Than, the sad victim, of the public rage.a__ 
[pg 064] 
At this, the fairest of her sex obeya__d, 
And veila__d her blushes in a silken shade; 
Unseen, and silent, from the train she moves, 
Led by the goddess of the Smiles and Loves. 
Arrived, and entera__d at the palace gate, 
The maids officious round their mistress wait; 
Then, all dispersing, various tasks attend; 
The queen and goddess to the prince ascend. 
Full in her Parisa__ sight, the queen of love 
Had placed the beauteous progeny of Jove; 
Where, as he viewa__d her charms, she turna__d away 
Her glowing eyes, and thus began to say: 
a_oeIs this the chief, who, lost to sense of shame, 
Late fled the field, and yet survives his fame? 
O hadst thou died beneath the righteous sword 
Of that brave man whom once I calla__d my lord! 
The boaster Paris oft desired the day 
With Spartaa__s king to meet in single fray: 
Go now, once more thy rivala__s rage excite, 
Provoke Atrides, and renew the fight: 
Yet Helen bids thee stay, lest thou unskilla__d 
Shouldst fall an easy conquest on the field.a__ 
The prince replies: a_oeAh cease, divinely fair, 
Nor add reproaches to the wounds I bear; 
This day the foe prevaila__d by Pallasa__ power: 
We yet may vanquish in a happier hour: 
There want not gods to favour us above; 
But let the business of our life be love: 
These softer moments let delights employ, 
And kind embraces snatch the hasty joy. 
Not thus I loved thee, when from Spartaa__s shore 
My forced, my willing heavenly prize I bore, 
When first entranced in Cranaea__s isle I lay,124 
Mixa__d with thy soul, and all dissolved away!a__ 
Thus having spoke, the enamoura__d Phrygian boy 
Rusha__d to the bed, impatient for the joy. 
Him Helen followa__d slow with bashful charms, 
And claspa__d the blooming hero in her arms. 
While these to lovea__s delicious rapture yield, 
The stern Atrides rages round the field: 
So some fell lion whom the woods obey, 
Roars through the desert, and demands his prey. 
Paris he seeks, impatient to destroy, 
But seeks in vain along the troops of Troy; 
Even those had yielded to a foe so brave 
The recreant warrior, hateful as the grave. 
Then speaking thus, the king of kings arose, 
a_oeYe Trojans, Dardans, all our generous foes! 
[pg 065] 
Hear and attest! from Heaven with conquest crowna__d, 
Our brothera__s arms the just success have found: 
Be therefore now the Spartan wealth restora__d, 
Let Argive Helen own her lawful lord; 
The appointed fine let Ilion justly pay, 
And age to age record this signal day.a__ 
He ceased; his armya__s loud applauses rise, 
And the long shout runs echoing through the skies. 
Illustration: VENUS. 
VENUS. 
[pg 066] 
Illustration: Map, titled "Graeciae Antiquae". 
Map, titled a_oeGraeciae Antiquaea__. 
[pg 067] 
BOOK IV. 
ARGUMENT. 
THE BREACH OF THE TRUCE, AND THE FIRST BATTLE. 
The gods deliberate in council concerning the Trojan war: they agree 
upon the continuation of it, and Jupiter sends down Minerva to break 
the truce. She persuades Pandarus to aim an arrow at Menelaus, who is 
wounded, but cured by Machaon. In the meantime some of the Trojan 
troops attack the Greeks. Agamemnon is distinguished in all the parts 
of a good general; he reviews the troops, and exhorts the leaders, some 
by praises and others by reproof. Nestor is particularly celebrated for 
his military discipline. The battle joins, and great numbers are slain 
on both sides. 
The same day continues through this as through the last book (as it 
does also through the two following, and almost to the end of the 
seventh book). The scene is wholly in the field before Troy. 
And now Olympusa__ shining gates unfold; 
The gods, with Jove, assume their thrones of gold: 
Immortal Hebe, fresh with bloom divine, 
The golden goblet crowns with purple wine: 
While the full bowls flow round, the powers employ 
Their careful eyes on long-contended Troy. 
When Jove, disposed to tempt Saturniaa__s spleen, 
Thus waked the fury of his partial queen, 
a_oeTwo powers divine the son of Atreus aid, 
Imperial Juno, and the martial maid;125 
But high in heaven they sit, and gaze from far, 
The tame spectators of his deeds of war. 
Not thus fair Venus helps her favoura__d knight, 
The queen of pleasures shares the toils of fight, 
Each danger wards, and constant in her care, 
Saves in the moment of the last despair. 
Her act has rescued Parisa__ forfeit life, 
Though great Atrides gaina__d the glorious strife. 
Then say, ye powers! what signal issue waits 
To crown this deed, and finish all the fates! 
[pg 068] 
Shall Heaven by peace the bleeding kingdoms spare, 
Or rouse the furies, and awake the war? 
Yet, would the gods for human good provide, 
Atrides soon might gain his beauteous bride, 
Still Priama__s walls in peaceful honours grow, 
And through his gates the crowding nations flow.a__ 
Thus while he spoke, the queen of heaven, enraged, 
And queen of war, in close consult engaged: 
Apart they sit, their deep designs employ, 
And meditate the future woes of Troy. 
Though secret anger swella__d Minervaa__s breast, 
The prudent goddess yet her wrath suppressa__d; 
But Juno, impotent of passion, broke 
Her sullen silence, and with fury spoke: 
Illustration: THE COUNCIL OF THE GODS. 
THE COUNCIL OF THE GODS. 
a_oeShall then, O tyrant of the ethereal reign! 
My schemes, my labours, and my hopes be vain? 
Have I, for this, shook Ilion with alarms, 
Assembled nations, set two worlds in arms? 
To spread the war, I flew from shore to shore; 
The immortal coursers scarce the labour bore. 
At length ripe vengeance oa__er their heads impends, 
But Jove himself the faithless race defends. 
Loth as thou art to punish lawless lust, 
Not all the gods are partial and unjust.a__ 
The sire whose thunder shakes the cloudy skies, 
Sighs from his inmost soul, and thus replies: 
a_oeOh lasting rancour! oh insatiate hate 
To Phrygiaa__s monarch, and the Phrygian state! 
What high offence has fired the wife of Jove? 
Can wretched mortals harm the powers above, 
[pg 069] 
That Troy, and Troya__s whole race thou wouldst confound, 
And yon fair structures level with the ground! 
Haste, leave the skies, fulfil thy stern desire, 
Burst all her gates, and wrap her walls in fire! 
Let Priam bleed! if yet you thirst for more, 
Bleed all his sons, and Ilion float with gore: 
To boundless vengeance the wide realm be given, 
Till vast destruction glut the queen of heaven! 
So let it be, and Jove his peace enjoy,126 
When heaven no longer hears the name of Troy. 
But should this arm prepare to wreak our hate 
On thy loved realms, whose guilt demands their fate; 
Presume not thou the lifted bolt to stay, 
Remember Troy, and give the vengeance way. 
For know, of all the numerous towns that rise 
Beneath the rolling sun and starry skies, 
Which gods have raised, or earth-born men enjoy, 
None stands so dear to Jove as sacred Troy. 
No mortals merit more distinguisha__d grace 
Than godlike Priam, or than Priama__s race. 
Still to our name their hecatombs expire, 
And altars blaze with unextinguisha__d fire.a__ 
At this the goddess rolled her radiant eyes, 
Then on the Thunderer fixa__d them, and replies: 
a_oeThree towns are Junoa__s on the Grecian plains, 
More dear than all the extended earth contains, 
Mycenae, Argos, and the Spartan wall;127 
These thou mayst raze, nor I forbid their fall: 
a__Tis not in me the vengeance to remove; 
The crimea__s sufficient that they share my love. 
Of power superior why should I complain? 
Resent I may, but must resent in vain. 
Yet some distinction Juno might require, 
Sprung with thyself from one celestial sire, 
A goddess born, to share the realms above, 
And styled the consort of the thundering Jove; 
Nor thou a wife and sistera__s right deny;128 
Let both consent, and both by terms comply; 
So shall the gods our joint decrees obey, 
And heaven shall act as we direct the way. 
See ready Pallas waits thy high commands 
To raise in arms the Greek and Phrygian bands; 
[pg 070] 
Their sudden friendship by her arts may cease, 
And the proud Trojans first infringe the peace.a__ 
The sire of men and monarch of the sky 
The advice approved, and bade Minerva fly, 
Dissolve the league, and all her arts employ 
To make the breach the faithless act of Troy. 
Fired with the charge, she headlong urged her flight, 
And shot like lightning from Olympusa__ height. 
As the red comet, from Saturnius sent 
To fright the nations with a dire portent, 
(A fatal sign to armies on the plain, 
Or trembling sailors on the wintry main,) 
With sweeping glories glides along in air, 
And shakes the sparkles from its blazing hair:129 
Between both armies thus, in open sight 
Shot the bright goddess in a trail of light, 
With eyes erect the gazing hosts admire 
The power descending, and the heavens on fire! 
a_oeThe gods (they cried), the gods this signal sent, 
And fate now labours with some vast event: 
Jove seals the league, or bloodier scenes prepares; 
Jove, the great arbiter of peace and wars.a__ 
They said, while Pallas through the Trojan throng, 
(In shape a mortal,) passa__d disguised along. 
Like bold Laodocus, her course she bent, 
Who from Antenor traced his high descent. 
Amidst the ranks Lycaona__s son she found, 
The warlike Pandarus, for strength renowna__d; 
Whose squadrons, led from black A_sepusa__ flood,130 
With flaming shields in martial circle stood. 
To him the goddess: a_oePhrygian! canst thou hear 
A well-timed counsel with a willing ear? 
What praise were thine, couldst thou direct thy dart, 
Amidst his triumph, to the Spartana__s heart? 
What gifts from Troy, from Paris wouldst thou gain, 
Thy countrya__s foe, the Grecian glory slain? 
Then seize the occasion, dare the mighty deed, 
Aim at his breast, and may that aim succeed! 
But first, to speed the shaft, address thy vow 
To Lycian Phoebus with the silver bow, 
And swear the firstlings of thy flock to pay, 
On Zeliaa__s altars, to the god of day.a__131 
He heard, and madly at the motion pleased, 
[pg 071] 
His polisha__d bow with hasty rashness seized. 
a__Twas forma__d of horn, and smootha__d with artful toil: 
A mountain goat resigna__d the shining spoil. 
Who pierced long since beneath his arrows bled; 
The stately quarry on the cliffs lay dead, 
And sixteen palms his browa__s large honours spread: 
The workmen joina__d, and shaped the bended horns, 
And beaten gold each taper point adorns. 
This, by the Greeks unseen, the warrior bends, 
Screena__d by the shields of his surrounding friends: 
There meditates the mark; and couching low, 
Fits the sharp arrow to the well-strung bow. 
One from a hundred feathera__d deaths he chose, 
Fated to wound, and cause of future woes; 
Then offers vows with hecatombs to crown 
Apolloa__s altars in his native town. 
Now with full force the yielding horn he bends, 
Drawn to an arch, and joins the doubling ends; 
Close to his breast he strains the nerve below, 
Till the barba__d points approach the circling bow; 
The impatient weapon whizzes on the wing; 
Sounds the tough horn, and twangs the quivering string. 
But thee, Atrides! in that dangerous hour 
The gods forget not, nor thy guardian power, 
Pallas assists, and (weakened in its force) 
Diverts the weapon from its destined course: 
So from her babe, when slumber seals his eye, 
The watchful mother wafts the envenoma__d fly. 
Just where his belt with golden buckles joina__d, 
Where linen folds the double corslet lined, 
She turna__d the shaft, which, hissing from above, 
Passa__d the broad belt, and through the corslet drove; 
The folds it pierced, the plaited linen tore, 
And razed the skin, and drew the purple gore. 
As when some stately trappings are decreed 
To grace a monarch on his bounding steed, 
A nymph in Caria or Maeonia bred, 
Stains the pure ivory with a lively red; 
With equal lustre various colours vie, 
The shining whiteness, and the Tyrian dye: 
So great Atrides! showa__d thy sacred blood, 
As down thy snowy thigh distilla__d the streaming flood. 
With horror seized, the king of men descried 
The shaft infixa__d, and saw the gushing tide: 
Nor less the Spartan feara__d, before he found 
The shining barb appear above the wound, 
Then, with a sigh, that heaved his manly breast, 
The royal brother thus his grief expressa__d, 
And graspa__d his hand; while all the Greeks around 
With answering sighs returna__d the plaintive sound. 
[pg 072] 
a_oeOh, dear as life! did I for this agree 
The solemn truce, a fatal truce to thee! 
Wert thou exposed to all the hostile train, 
To fight for Greece, and conquer, to be slain! 
The race of Trojans in thy ruin join, 
And faith is scorna__d by all the perjured line. 
Not thus our vows, confirma__d with wine and gore, 
Those hands we plighted, and those oaths we swore, 
Shall all be vain: when Heavena__s revenge is slow, 
Jove but prepares to strike the fiercer blow. 
The day shall come, that great avenging day, 
When Troya__s proud glories in the dust shall lay, 
When Priama__s powers and Priama__s self shall fall, 
And one prodigious ruin swallow all. 
I see the god, already, from the pole 
Bare his red arm, and bid the thunder roll; 
I see the Eternal all his fury shed, 
And shake his aegis oa__er their guilty head. 
Such mighty woes on perjured princes wait; 
But thou, alas! deserva__st a happier fate. 
Still must I mourn the period of thy days, 
And only mourn, without my share of praise? 
Deprived of thee, the heartless Greeks no more 
Shall dream of conquests on the hostile shore; 
Troy seized of Helen, and our glory lost, 
Thy bones shall moulder on a foreign coast; 
While some proud Trojan thus insulting cries, 
(And spurns the dust where Menelaus lies,) 
a__Such are the trophies Greece from Ilion brings, 
And such the conquest of her king of kings! 
Lo his proud vessels scattera__d oa__er the main, 
And unrevenged, his mighty brother slain.a__ 
Oh! ere that dire disgrace shall blast my fame, 
Oa__erwhelm me, earth! and hide a monarcha__s shame.a__ 
He said: a leadera__s and a brothera__s fears 
Possess his soul, which thus the Spartan cheers: 
a_oeLet not thy words the warmth of Greece abate; 
The feeble dart is guiltless of my fate: 
Stiff with the rich embroidera__d work around, 
My varied belt repella__d the flying wound.a__ 
To whom the king: a_oeMy brother and my friend, 
Thus, always thus, may Heaven thy life defend! 
Now seek some skilful hand, whose powerful art 
May stanch the effusion, and extract the dart. 
Herald, be swift, and bid Machaon bring 
His speedy succour to the Spartan king; 
Pierced with a winged shaft (the deed of Troy), 
The Greciana__s sorrow, and the Dardana__s joy.a__ 
With hasty zeal the swift Talthybius flies; 
Through the thick files he darts his searching eyes, 
[pg 073] 
And finds Machaon, where sublime he stands132 
In arms incircled with his native bands. 
Then thus: a_oeMachaon, to the king repair, 
His wounded brother claims thy timely care; 
Pierced by some Lycian or Dardanian bow, 
A grief to us, a triumph to the foe.a__ 
The heavy tidings grieved the godlike man 
Swift to his succour through the ranks he ran. 
The dauntless king yet standing firm he found, 
And all the chiefs in deep concern around. 
Where to the steely point the reed was joina__d, 
The shaft he drew, but left the head behind. 
Straight the broad belt with gay embroidery graced, 
He loosed; the corslet from his breast unbraced; 
Then sucka__d the blood, and sovereign balm infused,133 
Which Chiron gave, and A_sculapius used. 
While round the prince the Greeks employ their care, 
The Trojans rush tumultuous to the war; 
Once more they glitter in refulgent arms, 
Once more the fields are filla__d with dire alarms. 
Nor had you seen the king of men appear 
Confused, unactive, or surprised with fear; 
But fond of glory, with severe delight, 
His beating bosom claima__d the rising fight. 
No longer with his warlike steeds he staya__d, 
Or pressa__d the car with polisha__d brass inlaid 
But left Eurymedon the reins to guide; 
The fiery coursers snorted at his side. 
On foot through all the martial ranks he moves 
And these encourages, and those reproves. 
a_oeBrave men!a__ he cries, (to such who boldly dare 
Urge their swift steeds to face the coming war), 
a_oeYour ancient valour on the foes approve; 
Jove is with Greece, and let us trust in Jove. 
[pg 074] 
a__Tis not for us, but guilty Troy, to dread, 
Whose crimes sit heavy on her perjured head; 
Her sons and matrons Greece shall lead in chains, 
And her dead warriors strew the mournful plains.a__ 
Thus with new ardour he the brave inspires; 
Or thus the fearful with reproaches fires: 
a_oeShame to your country, scandal of your kind; 
Born to the fate ye well deserve to find! 
Why stand ye gazing round the dreadful plain, 
Prepared for flight, but dooma__d to fly in vain? 
Confused and panting thus, the hunted deer 
Falls as he flies, a victim to his fear. 
Still must ye wait the foes, and still retire, 
Till yon tall vessels blaze with Trojan fire? 
Or trust ye, Jove a valiant foe shall chase, 
To save a trembling, heartless, dastard race?a__ 
This said, he stalka__d with ample strides along, 
To Cretea__s brave monarch and his martial throng; 
High at their head he saw the chief appear, 
And bold Meriones excite the rear. 
At this the king his generous joy expressa__d, 
And claspa__d the warrior to his armed breast. 
a_oeDivine Idomeneus! what thanks we owe 
To worth like thine! what praise shall we bestow? 
To thee the foremost honours are decreed, 
First in the fight and every graceful deed. 
For this, in banquets, when the generous bowls 
Restore our blood, and raise the warriorsa__ souls, 
Though all the rest with stated rules we bound, 
Unmixa__d, unmeasured, are thy goblets crowna__d. 
Be still thyself, in arms a mighty name; 
Maintain thy honours, and enlarge thy fame.a__ 
To whom the Cretan thus his speech addressa__d: 
a_oeSecure of me, O king! exhort the rest. 
Fixa__d to thy side, in every toil I share, 
Thy firm associate in the day of war. 
But let the signal be this moment given; 
To mix in fight is all I ask of Heaven. 
The field shall prove how perjuries succeed, 
And chains or death avenge the impious deed.a__ 
Charma__d with this heat, the king his course pursues, 
And next the troops of either Ajax views: 
In one firm orb the bands were ranged around, 
A cloud of heroes blackena__d all the ground. 
Thus from the lofty promontorya__s brow 
A swain surveys the gathering storm below; 
Slow from the main the heavy vapours rise, 
Spread in dim streams, and sail along the skies, 
Till black as night the swelling tempest shows, 
The cloud condensing as the west-wind blows: 
[pg 075] 
He dreads the impending storm, and drives his flock 
To the close covert of an arching rock. 
Such, and so thick, the embattled squadrons stood, 
With spears erect, a moving iron wood: 
A shady light was shot from glimmering shields, 
And their brown arms obscured the dusky fields. 
a_oeO heroes! worthy such a dauntless train, 
Whose godlike virtue we but urge in vain, 
(Exclaima__d the king), who raise your eager bands 
With great examples, more than loud commands. 
Ah! would the gods but breathe in all the rest 
Such souls as burn in your exalted breast, 
Soon should our arms with just success be crowna__d, 
And Troya__s proud walls lie smoking on the ground.a__ 
Then to the next the general bends his course; 
(His heart exults, and glories in his force); 
There reverend Nestor ranks his Pylian bands, 
And with inspiring eloquence commands; 
With strictest order sets his train in arms, 
The chiefs advises, and the soldiers warms. 
Alastor, Chromius, Haemon, round him wait, 
Bias the good, and Pelagon the great. 
The horse and chariots to the front assigna__d, 
The foot (the strength of war) he ranged behind; 
The middle space suspected troops supply, 
Inclosed by both, nor left the power to fly; 
He gives command to a_oecurb the fiery steed, 
Nor cause confusion, nor the ranks exceed: 
Before the rest let none too rashly ride; 
No strength nor skill, but just in time, be tried: 
The charge once made, no warrior turn the rein, 
But fight, or fall; a firm embodied train. 
He whom the fortune of the field shall cast 
From forth his chariot, mount the next in haste; 
Nor seek unpractised to direct the car, 
Content with javelins to provoke the war. 
Our great forefathers held this prudent course, 
Thus ruled their ardour, thus preserved their force; 
By laws like these immortal conquests made, 
And eartha__s proud tyrants low in ashes laid.a__ 
So spoke the master of the martial art, 
And toucha__d with transport great Atridesa__ heart. 
a_oeOh! hadst thou strength to match thy brave desires, 
And nerves to second what thy soul inspires! 
But wasting years, that wither human race, 
Exhaust thy spirits, and thy arms unbrace. 
What once thou wert, oh ever mightst thou be! 
And age the lot of any chief but thee.a__ 
Thus to the experienced prince Atrides cried; 
He shook his hoary locks, and thus replied: 
[pg 076] 
a_oeWell might I wish, could mortal wish renew134 
That strength which once in boiling youth I knew; 
Such as I was, when Ereuthalion, slain 
Beneath this arm, fell prostrate on the plain. 
But heaven its gifts not all at once bestows, 
These years with wisdom crowns, with action those: 
The field of combat fits the young and bold, 
The solemn council best becomes the old: 
To you the glorious conflict I resign, 
Let sage advice, the palm of age, be mine.a__ 
He said. With joy the monarch marcha__d before, 
And found Menestheus on the dusty shore, 
With whom the firm Athenian phalanx stands; 
And next Ulysses, with his subject bands. 
Remote their forces lay, nor knew so far 
The peace infringed, nor heard the sounds of war; 
The tumult late begun, they stood intent 
To watch the motion, dubious of the event. 
The king, who saw their squadrons yet unmoved, 
With hasty ardour thus the chiefs reproved: 
a_oeCan Peleusa__ son forget a warriora__s part. 
And fears Ulysses, skilla__d in every art? 
Why stand you distant, and the rest expect 
To mix in combat which yourselves neglect? 
From you a__twas hoped among the first to dare 
The shock of armies, and commence the war; 
For this your names are calla__d before the rest, 
To share the pleasures of the genial feast: 
And can you, chiefs! without a blush survey 
Whole troops before you labouring in the fray? 
Say, is it thus those honours you requite? 
The first in banquets, but the last in fight.a__ 
Ulysses heard: the heroa__s warmth oa__erspread 
His cheek with blushes: and severe, he said: 
a_oeTake back the unjust reproach! Behold we stand 
Sheathed in bright arms, and but expect command. 
If glorious deeds afford thy soul delight, 
Behold me plunging in the thickest fight. 
Then give thy warrior-chief a warriora__s due, 
Who dares to act whatea__er thou dara__st to view.a__ 
Struck with his generous wrath, the king replies: 
a_oeO great in action, and in council wise! 
With ours, thy care and ardour are the same, 
[pg 077] 
Nor need I to commend, nor aught to blame. 
Sage as thou art, and learna__d in human kind, 
Forgive the transport of a martial mind. 
Haste to the fight, secure of just amends; 
The gods that make, shall keep the worthy, friends.a__ 
He said, and passa__d where great Tydides lay, 
His steeds and chariots wedged in firm array; 
(The warlike Sthenelus attends his side;)135 
To whom with stern reproach the monarch cried: 
a_oeO son of Tydeus! (he, whose strength could tame 
The bounding steed, in arms a mighty name) 
Canst thou, remote, the mingling hosts descry, 
With hands unactive, and a careless eye? 
Not thus thy sire the fierce encounter feara__d; 
Still first in front the matchless prince appeara__d: 
What glorious toils, what wonders they recite, 
Who viewa__d him labouring through the ranks of fight? 
I saw him once, when gathering martial powers, 
A peaceful guest, he sought Mycenaea__s towers; 
Armies he aska__d, and armies had been given, 
Not we denied, but Jove forbade from heaven; 
While dreadful comets glaring from afar, 
Forewarna__d the horrors of the Theban war.136 
Next, sent by Greece from where Asopus flows, 
A fearless envoy, he approacha__d the foes; 
Thebesa__ hostile walls unguarded and alone, 
Dauntless he enters, and demands the throne. 
The tyrant feasting with his chiefs he found, 
And dared to combat all those chiefs around: 
Dared, and subdued before their haughty lord; 
For Pallas strung his arm and edged his sword. 
Stung with the shame, within the winding way, 
To bar his passage fifty warriors lay; 
Two heroes led the secret squadron on, 
Mason the fierce, and hardy Lycophon; 
Those fifty slaughtera__d in the gloomy vale. 
He spared but one to bear the dreadful tale, 
Such Tydeus was, and such his martial fire; 
Gods! how the son degenerates from the sire!a__ 
No words the godlike Diomed returna__d, 
But heard respectful, and in secret burna__d: 
Not so fierce Capaneusa__ undaunted son; 
Stern as his sire, the boaster thus begun: 
a_oeWhat needs, O monarch! this invidious praise, 
Ourselves to lessen, while our sire you raise? 
Dare to be just, Atrides! and confess 
[pg 078] 
Our value equal, though our fury less. 
With fewer troops we storma__d the Theban wall, 
And happier saw the sevenfold city fall,137 
In impious acts the guilty father died; 
The sons subdued, for Heaven was on their side. 
Far more than heirs of all our parentsa__ fame, 
Our glories darken their diminisha__d name.a__ 
To him Tydides thus: a_oeMy friend, forbear; 
Suppress thy passion, and the king revere: 
His high concern may well excuse this rage, 
Whose cause we follow, and whose war we wage: 
His the first praise, were Iliona__s towers oa__erthrown, 
And, if we fail, the chief disgrace his own. 
Let him the Greeks to hardy toils excite, 
a__Tis ours to labour in the glorious fight.a__ 
He spoke, and ardent, on the trembling ground 
Sprung from his car: his ringing arms resound. 
Dire was the clang, and dreadful from afar, 
Of arma__d Tydides rushing to the war. 
As when the winds, ascending by degrees,138 
First move the whitening surface of the seas, 
The billows float in order to the shore, 
The wave behind rolls on the wave before; 
Till, with the growing storm, the deeps arise, 
Foam oa__er the rocks, and thunder to the skies. 
So to the fight the thick battalions throng, 
Shields urged on shields, and men drove men along 
Sedate and silent move the numerous bands; 
No sound, no whisper, but the chiefa__s commands, 
Those only heard; with awe the rest obey, 
As if some god had snatcha__d their voice away. 
Not so the Trojans; from their host ascends 
A general shout that all the region rends. 
As when the fleecy flocks unnumbera__d stand 
In wealthy folds, and wait the milkera__s hand, 
The hollow vales incessant bleating fills, 
The lambs reply from all the neighbouring hills: 
Such clamours rose from various nations round, 
Mixa__d was the murmur, and confused the sound. 
Each host now joins, and each a god inspires, 
These Mars incites, and those Minerva fires, 
Pale flight around, and dreadful terror reign; 
And discord raging bathes the purple plain; 
[pg 079] 
Discord! dire sister of the slaughtering power, 
Small at her birth, but rising every hour, 
While scarce the skies her horrid head can bound, 
She stalks on earth, and shakes the world around;139 
The nations bleed, wherea__er her steps she turns, 
The groan still deepens, and the combat burns. 
Now shield with shield, with helmet helmet closed, 
To armour armour, lance to lance opposed, 
Host against host with shadowy squadrons drew, 
The sounding darts in iron tempests flew, 
Victors and vanquisha__d joina__d promiscuous cries, 
And shrilling shouts and dying groans arise; 
With streaming blood the slippery fields are dyed, 
And slaughtera__d heroes swell the dreadful tide. 
As torrents roll, increased by numerous rills, 
With rage impetuous, down their echoing hills 
Rush to the vales, and poura__d along the plain. 
Roar through a thousand channels to the main: 
The distant shepherd trembling hears the sound; 
So mix both hosts, and so their cries rebound. 
The bold Antilochus the slaughter led, 
The first who struck a valiant Trojan dead: 
At great Echepolus the lance arrives, 
Razed his high crest, and through his helmet drives; 
Warma__d in the brain the brazen weapon lies, 
And shades eternal settle oa__er his eyes. 
So sinks a tower, that long assaults had stood 
Of force and fire, its walls besmeara__d with blood. 
Him, the bold leader of the Abantian throng,140 
Seized to despoil, and dragga__d the corpse along: 
But while he strove to tug the inserted dart, 
Agenora__s javelin reacha__d the heroa__s heart. 
His flank, unguarded by his ample shield, 
Admits the lance: he falls, and spurns the field; 
The nerves, unbraced, support his limbs no more; 
The soul comes floating in a tide of gore. 
Trojans and Greeks now gather round the slain; 
The war renews, the warriors bleed again: 
As oa__er their prey rapacious wolves engage, 
Man dies on man, and all is blood and rage. 
In blooming youth fair Simoisius fell, 
Sent by great Ajax to the shades of hell; 
Fair Simoisius, whom his mother bore 
Amid the flocks on silver Simoisa__ shore: 
The nymph descending from the hills of Ide, 
To seek her parents on his flowery side, 
[pg 080] 
Brought forth the babe, their common care and joy, 
And thence from Simois named the lovely boy. 
Short was his date! by dreadful Ajax slain, 
He falls, and renders all their cares in vain! 
So falls a poplar, that in watery ground 
Raised high the head, with stately branches crowna__d, 
(Fella__d by some artist with his shining steel, 
To shape the circle of the bending wheel,) 
Cut down it lies, tall, smooth, and largely spread, 
With all its beauteous honours on its head 
There, left a subject to the wind and rain, 
And scorcha__d by suns, it withers on the plain 
Thus pierced by Ajax, Simoisius lies 
Stretcha__d on the shore, and thus neglected dies. 
At Ajax, Antiphus his javelin threw; 
The pointed lance with erring fury flew, 
And Leucus, loved by wise Ulysses, slew. 
He drops the corpse of Simoisius slain, 
And sinks a breathless carcase on the plain. 
This saw Ulysses, and with grief enraged, 
Strode where the foremost of the foes engaged; 
Arma__d with his spear, he meditates the wound, 
In act to throw; but cautious looka__d around, 
Struck at his sight the Trojans backward drew, 
And trembling heard the javelin as it flew. 
A chief stood nigh, who from Abydos came, 
Old Priama__s son, Democoon was his name. 
The weapon entered close above his ear, 
Cold through his temples glides the whizzing spear;141 
With piercing shrieks the youth resigns his breath, 
His eye-balls darken with the shades of death; 
Ponderous he falls; his clanging arms resound, 
And his broad buckler rings against the ground. 
Seized with affright the boldest foes appear; 
Ea__en godlike Hector seems himself to fear; 
Slow he gave way, the rest tumultuous fled; 
The Greeks with shouts press on, and spoil the dead: 
But Phoebus now from Iliona__s towering height 
Shines forth reveala__d, and animates the fight. 
a_oeTrojans, be bold, and force with force oppose; 
Your foaming steeds urge headlong on the foes! 
Nor are their bodies rocks, nor ribba__d with steel; 
Your weapons enter, and your strokes they feel. 
Have ye forgot what seema__d your dread before? 
The great, the fierce Achilles fights no more.a__ 
Apollo thus from Iliona__s lofty towers, 
Arraya__d in terrors, roused the Trojan powers: 
While wara__s fierce goddess fires the Grecian foe, 
[pg 081] 
And shouts and thunders in the fields below. 
Then great Diores fell, by doom divine, 
In vain his valour and illustrious line. 
A broken rock the force of Pyrus threw, 
(Who from cold A_nus led the Thracian crew,)142 
Full on his ankle droppa__d the ponderous stone, 
Burst the strong nerves, and crasha__d the solid bone. 
Supine he tumbles on the crimson sands, 
Before his helpless friends, and native bands, 
And spreads for aid his unavailing hands. 
The foe rusha__d furious as he pants for breath, 
And through his navel drove the pointed death: 
His gushing entrails smoked upon the ground, 
And the warm life came issuing from the wound. 
His lance bold Thoas at the conqueror sent, 
Deep in his breast above the pap it went, 
Amid the lungs was fixa__d the winged wood, 
And quivering in his heaving bosom stood: 
Till from the dying chief, approaching near, 
The A_tolian warrior tugga__d his weighty spear: 
Then sudden waved his flaming falchion round, 
And gasha__d his belly with a ghastly wound; 
The corpse now breathless on the bloody plain, 
To spoil his arms the victor strove in vain; 
The Thracian bands against the victor pressa__d, 
A grove of lances glittera__d at his breast. 
Stern Thoas, glaring with revengeful eyes, 
In sullen fury slowly quits the prize. 
Thus fell two heroes; one the pride of Thrace, 
And one the leader of the Epeian race; 
Deatha__s sable shade at once oa__ercast their eyes, 
In dust the vanquisha__d and the victor lies. 
With copious slaughter all the fields are red, 
And heapa__d with growing mountains of the dead. 
Had some brave chief this martial scene beheld, 
By Pallas guarded through the dreadful field; 
Might darts be bid to turn their points away, 
And swords around him innocently play; 
The wara__s whole art with wonder had he seen, 
And counted heroes where he counted men. 
So fought each host, with thirst of glory fired, 
And crowds on crowds triumphantly expired. 
[pg 082] 
Illustration: Map of the Plain of Troy. 
Map of the Plain of Troy. 
[pg 083] 
BOOK V. 
ARGUMENT. 
THE ACTS OF DIOMED. 
Diomed, assisted by Pallas, performs wonders in this daya__s battle. 
Pandarus wounds him with an arrow, but the goddess cures him, enables 
him to discern gods from mortals, and prohibits him from contending 
with any of the former, excepting Venus. A_neas joins Pandarus to oppose 
him; Pandarus is killed, and A_neas in great danger but for the 
assistance of Venus; who, as she is removing her son from the fight, is 
wounded on the hand by Diomed. Apollo seconds her in his rescue, and at 
length carries off A_neas to Troy, where he is healed in the temple of 
Pergamus. Mars rallies the Trojans, and assists Hector to make a stand. 
In the meantime A_neas is restored to the field, and they overthrow 
several of the Greeks; among the rest Tlepolemus is slain by Sarpedon. 
Juno and Minerva descend to resist Mars; the latter incites Diomed to 
go against that god; he wounds him, and sends him groaning to heaven. 
The first battle continues through this book. The scene is the same as 
in the former. 
But Pallas now Tydidesa__ soul inspires,143 
Fills with her force, and warms with all her fires, 
Above the Greeks his deathless fame to raise, 
And crown her hero with distinguisha__d praise. 
High on his helm celestial lightnings play, 
His beamy shield emits a living ray; 
The unwearied blaze incessant streams supplies, 
Like the red star that fires the autumnal skies, 
When fresh he rears his radiant orb to sight, 
And, bathed in ocean, shoots a keener light. 
Such glories Pallas on the chief bestowa__d, 
Such, from his arms, the fierce effulgence flowa__d: 
Onward she drives him, furious to engage, 
Where the fight burns, and where the thickest rage. 
The sons of Dares first the combat sought, 
A wealthy priest, but rich without a fault; 
[pg 084] 
In Vulcana__s fane the fathera__s days were led, 
The sons to toils of glorious battle bred; 
These singled from their troops the fight maintain, 
These, from their steeds, Tydides on the plain. 
Fierce for renown the brother-chiefs draw near, 
And first bold Phegeus cast his sounding spear, 
Which oa__er the warriora__s shoulder took its course, 
And spent in empty air its erring force. 
Not so, Tydides, flew thy lance in vain, 
But pierced his breast, and stretcha__d him on the plain. 
Seized with unusual fear, Idaeus fled, 
Left the rich chariot, and his brother dead. 
And had not Vulcan lent celestial aid, 
He too had sunk to deatha__s eternal shade; 
But in a smoky cloud the god of fire 
Preserved the son, in pity to the sire. 
The steeds and chariot, to the navy led, 
Increased the spoils of gallant Diomed. 
Struck with amaze and shame, the Trojan crew, 
Or slain, or fled, the sons of Dares view; 
When by the blood-staina__d hand Minerva pressa__d 
The god of battles, and this speech addressa__d: 
a_oeStern power of war! by whom the mighty fall, 
Who bathe in blood, and shake the lofty wall! 
Let the brave chiefs their glorious toils divide; 
And whose the conquest, mighty Jove decide: 
While we from interdicted fields retire, 
Nor tempt the wrath of heavena__s avenging sire.a__ 
Her words allay the impetuous warriora__s heat, 
The god of arms and martial maid retreat; 
Removed from fight, on Xanthusa__ flowery bounds 
They sat, and listena__d to the dying sounds. 
Meantime, the Greeks the Trojan race pursue, 
And some bold chieftain every leader slew: 
First Odius falls, and bites the bloody sand, 
His death ennobled by Atridesa__ hand: 
As he to flight his wheeling car addressa__d, 
The speedy javelin drove from back to breast. 
In dust the mighty Halizonian lay, 
His arms resound, the spirit wings its way. 
Thy fate was next, O Phaestus! dooma__d to feel 
The great Idomeneusa__ protended steel; 
Whom Borus sent (his son and only joy) 
From fruitful Tarne to the fields of Troy. 
The Cretan javelin reacha__d him from afar, 
And pierced his shoulder as he mounts his car; 
Back from the car he tumbles to the ground, 
And everlasting shades his eyes surround. 
Then died Scamandrius, expert in the chase, 
In woods and wilds to wound the savage race; 
[pg 085] 
Diana taught him all her sylvan arts, 
To bend the bow, and aim unerring darts: 
But vainly here Dianaa__s arts he tries, 
The fatal lance arrests him as he flies; 
From Menelausa__ arm the weapon sent, 
Through his broad back and heaving bosom went: 
Down sinks the warrior with a thundering sound, 
His brazen armour rings against the ground. 
Next artful Phereclus untimely fell; 
Bold Merion sent him to the realms of hell. 
Thy fathera__s skill, O Phereclus! was thine, 
The graceful fabric and the fair design; 
For loved by Pallas, Pallas did impart 
To him the shipwrighta__s and the buildera__s art. 
Beneath his hand the fleet of Paris rose, 
The fatal cause of all his countrya__s woes; 
But he, the mystic will of heaven unknown, 
Nor saw his countrya__s peril, nor his own. 
The hapless artist, while confused he fled, 
The spear of Merion mingled with the dead. 
Through his right hip, with forceful fury cast, 
Between the bladder and the bone it passa__d; 
Prone on his knees he falls with fruitless cries, 
And death in lasting slumber seals his eyes. 
From Megesa__ force the swift Pedaeus fled, 
Antenora__s offspring from a foreign bed, 
Whose generous spouse, Theanor, heavenly fair, 
Nursed the young stranger with a mothera__s care. 
How vain those cares! when Meges in the rear 
Full in his nape infixa__d the fatal spear; 
Swift through his crackling jaws the weapon glides, 
And the cold tongue and grinning teeth divides. 
Then died Hypsenor, generous and divine, 
Sprung from the brave Dolopiona__s mighty line, 
Who near adored Scamander made abode, 
Priest of the stream, and honoured as a god. 
On him, amidst the flying numbers found, 
Eurypylus inflicts a deadly wound; 
On his broad shoulders fell the forceful brand, 
Thence glancing downwards, loppa__d his holy hand, 
Which staina__d with sacred blood the blushing sand. 
Down sunk the priest: the purple hand of death 
Closed his dim eye, and fate suppressa__d his breath. 
Thus toila__d the chiefs, in different parts engaged. 
In every quarter fierce Tydides raged; 
Amid the Greek, amid the Trojan train, 
Rapt through the ranks he thunders oa__er the plain; 
Now here, now there, he darts from place to place, 
Pours on the rear, or lightens in their face. 
Thus from high hills the torrents swift and strong 
[pg 086] 
Deluge whole fields, and sweep the trees along, 
Through ruina__d moles the rushing wave resounds, 
Oa__erwhelma__s the bridge, and bursts the lofty bounds; 
The yellow harvests of the ripena__d year, 
And flatted vineyards, one sad waste appear!144 
While Jove descends in sluicy sheets of rain, 
And all the labours of mankind are vain. 
So raged Tydides, boundless in his ire, 
Drove armies back, and made all Troy retire. 
With grief the leader of the Lycian band 
Saw the wide waste of his destructive hand: 
His bended bow against the chief he drew; 
Swift to the mark the thirsty arrow flew, 
Whose forky point the hollow breastplate tore, 
Deep in his shoulder pierced, and drank the gore: 
The rushing stream his brazen armour dyed, 
While the proud archer thus exulting cried: 
a_oeHither, ye Trojans, hither drive your steeds! 
Lo! by our hand the bravest Grecian bleeds, 
Not long the deathful dart he can sustain; 
Or Phoebus urged me to these fields in vain.a__ 
So spoke he, boastful: but the winged dart 
Stoppa__d short of life, and mocka__d the shootera__s art. 
The wounded chief, behind his car retired, 
The helping hand of Sthenelus required; 
Swift from his seat he leapa__d upon the ground, 
And tugga__d the weapon from the gushing wound; 
When thus the king his guardian power addressa__d, 
The purple current wandering oa__er his vest: 
a_oeO progeny of Jove! unconquera__d maid! 
If ea__er my godlike sire deserved thy aid, 
If ea__er I felt thee in the fighting field; 
Now, goddess, now, thy sacred succour yield. 
O give my lance to reach the Trojan knight, 
Whose arrow wounds the chief thou guarda__st in fight; 
And lay the boaster grovelling on the shore, 
That vaunts these eyes shall view the light no more.a__ 
Thus praya__d Tydides, and Minerva heard, 
His nerves confirma__d, his languid spirits cheera__d; 
He feels each limb with wonted vigour light; 
His beating bosom claima__d the promised fight. 
a_oeBe bold, (she cried), in every combat shine, 
War be thy province, thy protection mine; 
Rush to the fight, and every foe control; 
Wake each paternal virtue in thy soul: 
[pg 087] 
Strength swells thy boiling breast, infused by me, 
And all thy godlike father breathes in thee; 
Yet more, from mortal mists I purge thy eyes,145 
And set to view the warring deities. 
These see thou shun, through all the embattled plain; 
Nor rashly strive where human force is vain. 
If Venus mingle in the martial band, 
Her shalt thou wound: so Pallas gives command.a__ 
With that, the blue-eyed virgin winga__d her flight; 
The hero rusha__d impetuous to the fight; 
With tenfold ardour now invades the plain, 
Wild with delay, and more enraged by pain. 
As on the fleecy flocks when hunger calls, 
Amidst the field a brindled lion falls; 
If chance some shepherd with a distant dart 
The savage wound, he rouses at the smart, 
He foams, he roars; the shepherd dares not stay, 
But trembling leaves the scattering flocks a prey; 
Heaps fall on heaps; he bathes with blood the ground, 
Then leaps victorious oa__er the lofty mound. 
Not with less fury stern Tydides flew; 
And two brave leaders at an instant slew; 
Astynous breathless fell, and by his side, 
His peoplea__s pastor, good Hypenor, died; 
Astynousa__ breast the deadly lance receives, 
Hypenora__s shoulder his broad falchion cleaves. 
Those slain he left, and sprung with noble rage 
Abas and Polyidus to engage; 
Sons of Eurydamus, who, wise and old, 
Could fate foresee, and mystic dreams unfold; 
The youths returna__d not from the doubtful plain, 
And the sad father tried his arts in vain; 
No mystic dream could make their fates appear, 
Though now determined by Tydidesa__ spear. 
Young Xanthus next, and Thoon felt his rage; 
The joy and hope of Phaenopsa__ feeble age: 
Vast was his wealth, and these the only heirs 
Of all his labours and a life of cares. 
Cold death oa__ertakes them in their blooming years, 
And leaves the father unavailing tears: 
To strangers now descends his heapy store, 
The race forgotten, and the name no more. 
Two sons of Priam in one chariot ride, 
Glittering in arms, and combat side by side. 
As when the lordly lion seeks his food 
Where grazing heifers range the lonely wood, 
[pg 088] 
He leaps amidst them with a furious bound, 
Bends their strong necks, and tears them to the ground: 
So from their seats the brother chiefs are torn, 
Their steeds and chariot to the navy borne. 
With deep concern divine A_neas viewa__d 
The foe prevailing, and his friends pursued; 
Through the thick storm of singing spears he flies, 
Exploring Pandarus with careful eyes. 
At length he found Lycaona__s mighty son; 
To whom the chief of Venusa__ race begun: 
a_oeWhere, Pandarus, are all thy honours now, 
Thy winged arrows and unerring bow, 
Thy matchless skill, thy yet unrivalla__d fame, 
And boasted glory of the Lycian name? 
O pierce that mortal! if we mortal call 
That wondrous force by which whole armies fall; 
Or god incensed, who quits the distant skies 
To punish Troy for slighted sacrifice; 
(Which, oh avert from our unhappy state! 
For what so dreadful as celestial hate)? 
Whoea__er he be, propitiate Jove with prayer; 
If man, destroy; if god, entreat to spare.a__ 
To him the Lycian: a_oeWhom your eyes behold, 
If right I judge, is Diomed the bold: 
Such coursers whirl him oa__er the dusty field, 
So towers his helmet, and so flames his shield. 
If a__tis a god, he wears that chiefa__s disguise: 
Or if that chief, some guardian of the skies, 
Involved in clouds, protects him in the fray, 
And turns unseen the frustrate dart away. 
I winga__d an arrow, which not idly fell, 
The stroke had fixa__d him to the gates of hell; 
And, but some god, some angry god withstands, 
His fate was due to these unerring hands. 
Skilla__d in the bow, on foot I sought the war, 
Nor joina__d swift horses to the rapid car. 
Ten polisha__d chariots I possessa__d at home, 
And still they grace Lycaona__s princely dome: 
There veila__d in spacious coverlets they stand; 
And twice ten coursers wait their lorda__s command. 
The good old warrior bade me trust to these, 
When first for Troy I saila__d the sacred seas; 
In fields, aloft, the whirling car to guide, 
And through the ranks of death triumphant ride. 
But vain with youth, and yet to thrift inclined, 
I heard his counsels with unheedful mind, 
And thought the steeds (your large supplies unknown) 
Might fail of forage in the straitena__d town; 
So took my bow and pointed darts in hand 
And left the chariots in my native land. 
[pg 089] 
a_oeToo late, O friend! my rashness I deplore; 
These shafts, once fatal, carry death no more. 
Tydeusa__ and Atreusa__ sons their points have found, 
And undissembled gore pursued the wound. 
In vain they bleed: this unavailing bow 
Serves, not to slaughter, but provoke the foe. 
In evil hour these bended horns I strung, 
And seized the quiver where it idly hung. 
Cursed be the fate that sent me to the field 
Without a warriora__s arms, the spear and shield! 
If ea__er with life I quit the Trojan plain, 
If ea__er I see my spouse and sire again, 
This bow, unfaithful to my glorious aims, 
Broke by my hand, shall feed the blazing flames.a__ 
To whom the leader of the Dardan race: 
a_oeBe calm, nor Phoebusa__ honoura__d gift disgrace. 
The distant dart be praised, though here we need 
The rushing chariot and the bounding steed. 
Against yon hero let us bend our course, 
And, hand to hand, encounter force with force. 
Now mount my seat, and from the chariota__s height 
Observe my fathera__s steeds, renowna__d in fight; 
Practised alike to turn, to stop, to chase, 
To dare the shock, or urge the rapid race; 
Secure with these, through fighting fields we go; 
Or safe to Troy, if Jove assist the foe. 
Haste, seize the whip, and snatch the guiding rein; 
The warriora__s fury let this arm sustain; 
Or, if to combat thy bold heart incline, 
Take thou the spear, the chariota__s care be mine.a__ 
a_oeO prince! (Lycaona__s valiant son replied) 
As thine the steeds, be thine the task to guide. 
The horses, practised to their lorda__s command, 
Shall bear the rein, and answer to thy hand; 
But, if, unhappy, we desert the fight, 
Thy voice alone can animate their flight; 
Else shall our fates be numbera__d with the dead, 
And these, the victora__s prize, in triumph led. 
Thine be the guidance, then: with spear and shield 
Myself will charge this terror of the field.a__ 
And now both heroes mount the glittering car; 
The bounding coursers rush amidst the war; 
Their fierce approach bold Sthenelus espied, 
Who thus, alarma__d, to great Tydides cried: 
a_oeO friend! two chiefs of force immense I see, 
Dreadful they come, and bend their rage on thee: 
Lo the brave heir of old Lycaona__s line, 
And great A_neas, sprung from race divine! 
Enough is given to fame. Ascend thy car! 
And save a life, the bulwark of our war.a__ 
[pg 090] 
At this the hero cast a gloomy look, 
Fixa__d on the chief with scorn; and thus he spoke: 
a_oeMe dost thou bid to shun the coming fight? 
Me wouldst thou move to base, inglorious flight? 
Know, a__tis not honest in my soul to fear, 
Nor was Tydides born to tremble here. 
I hate the cumbrous chariota__s slow advance, 
And the long distance of the flying lance; 
But while my nerves are strong, my force entire, 
Thus front the foe, and emulate my sire. 
Nor shall yon steeds, that fierce to fight convey 
Those threatening heroes, bear them both away; 
One chief at least beneath this arm shall die; 
So Pallas tells me, and forbids to fly. 
But if she dooms, and if no god withstand, 
That both shall fall by one victorious hand, 
Then heed my words: my horses here detain, 
Fixa__d to the chariot by the straitena__d rein; 
Swift to A_neasa__ empty seat proceed, 
And seize the coursers of ethereal breed; 
The race of those, which once the thundering god146 
For ravisha__d Ganymede on Tros bestowa__d, 
The best that ea__er on eartha__s broad surface run, 
Beneath the rising or the setting sun. 
Hence great Anchises stole a breed unknown, 
By mortal mares, from fierce Laomedon: 
Four of this race his ample stalls contain, 
And two transport A_neas oa__er the plain. 
These, were the rich immortal prize our own, 
Through the wide world should make our glory known.a__ 
Thus while they spoke, the foe came furious on, 
And stern Lycaona__s warlike race begun: 
a_oePrince, thou art met. Though late in vain assaila__d, 
The spear may enter where the arrow faila__d.a__ 
He said, then shook the ponderous lance, and flung; 
On his broad shield the sounding weapon rung, 
Pierced the tough orb, and in his cuirass hung, 
a_oeHe bleeds! the pride of Greece! (the boaster cries,) 
Our triumph now, the mighty warrior lies!a__ 
a_oeMistaken vaunter! (Diomed replied;) 
Thy dart has erred, and now my spear be tried; 
Ye a__scape not both; one, headlong from his car, 
With hostile blood shall glut the god of war.a__ 
He spoke, and rising hurla__d his forceful dart, 
[pg 091] 
Which, driven by Pallas, pierced a vital part; 
Full in his face it entera__d, and betwixt 
The nose and eye-ball the proud Lycian fixa__d; 
Crasha__d all his jaws, and cleft the tongue within, 
Till the bright point looka__d out beneath the chin. 
Headlong he falls, his helmet knocks the ground: 
Earth groans beneath him, and his arms resound; 
The starting coursers tremble with affright; 
The soul indignant seeks the realms of night. 
To guard his slaughtera__d friend, A_neas flies, 
His spear extending where the carcase lies; 
Watchful he wheels, protects it every way, 
As the grim lion stalks around his prey. 
Oa__er the falla__n trunk his ample shield displaya__d, 
He hides the hero with his mighty shade, 
And threats aloud! the Greeks with longing eyes 
Behold at distance, but forbear the prize. 
Then fierce Tydides stoops; and from the fields 
Heaved with vast force, a rocky fragment wields. 
Not two strong men the enormous weight could raise, 
Such men as live in these degenerate days:147 
He swung it round; and, gathering strength to throw, 
Discharged the ponderous ruin at the foe. 
Where to the hip the inserted thigh unites, 
Full on the bone the pointed marble lights; 
Through both the tendons broke the rugged stone, 
And strippa__d the skin, and cracka__d the solid bone. 
Sunk on his knees, and staggering with his pains, 
His falling bulk his bended arm sustains; 
Lost in a dizzy mist the warrior lies; 
A sudden cloud comes swimming oa__er his eyes. 
There the brave chief, who mighty numbers swaya__d, 
Oppressa__d had sunk to deatha__s eternal shade, 
But heavenly Venus, mindful of the love 
She bore Anchises in the Idaean grove, 
His danger views with anguish and despair, 
And guards her offspring with a mothera__s care. 
About her much-loved son her arms she throws, 
Her arms whose whiteness match the falling snows. 
Screena__d from the foe behind her shining veil, 
The swords wave harmless, and the javelins fail; 
Safe through the rushing horse, and feathera__d flight 
Of sounding shafts, she bears him from the fight. 
Nor Sthenelus, with unassisting hands, 
Remaina__d unheedful of his lorda__s commands: 
His panting steeds, removed from out the war, 
He fixa__d with straitena__d traces to the car, 
Next, rushing to the Dardan spoil, detains 
[pg 092] 
The heavenly coursers with the flowing manes: 
These in proud triumph to the fleet conveya__d, 
No longer now a Trojan lord obeya__d. 
That charge to bold Deipylus he gave, 
(Whom most he loved, as brave men love the brave,) 
Then mounting on his car, resumed the rein, 
And followa__d where Tydides swept the plain. 
Meanwhile (his conquest ravished from his eyes) 
The raging chief in chase of Venus flies: 
No goddess she, commissiona__d to the field, 
Like Pallas dreadful with her sable shield, 
Or fierce Bellona thundering at the wall, 
While flames ascend, and mighty ruins fall; 
He knew soft combats suit the tender dame, 
New to the field, and still a foe to fame. 
Through breaking ranks his furious course he bends, 
And at the goddess his broad lance extends; 
Through her bright veil the daring weapon drove, 
The ambrosial veil which all the Graces wove; 
Her snowy hand the razing steel profaned, 
And the transparent skin with crimson staina__d, 
From the clear vein a stream immortal flowa__d, 
Such stream as issues from a wounded god;148 
Pure emanation! uncorrupted flood! 
Unlike our gross, diseased, terrestrial blood: 
(For not the bread of man their life sustains, 
Nor winea__s inflaming juice supplies their veins:) 
With tender shrieks the goddess filla__d the place, 
And droppa__d her offspring from her weak embrace. 
Him Phoebus took: he casts a cloud around 
The fainting chief, and wards the mortal wound. 
Then with a voice that shook the vaulted skies, 
The king insults the goddess as she flies: 
a_oeIll with Jovea__s daughter bloody fights agree, 
The field of combat is no scene for thee: 
Go, let thy own soft sex employ thy care, 
Go, lull the coward, or delude the fair. 
Taught by this stroke renounce the wara__s alarms, 
And learn to tremble at the name of arms.a__ 
Tydides thus. The goddess, seized with dread, 
Confused, distracted, from the conflict fled. 
To aid her, swift the winged Iris flew, 
Wrapt in a mist above the warring crew. 
The queen of love with faded charms she found. 
Pale was her cheek, and livid looka__d the wound. 
To Mars, who sat remote, they bent their way: 
[pg 093] 
Far, on the left, with clouds involved he lay; 
Beside him stood his lance, distaina__d with gore, 
And, reina__d with gold, his foaming steeds before. 
Low at his knee, she begga__d with streaming eyes 
Her brothera__s car, to mount the distant skies, 
And showa__d the wound by fierce Tydides given, 
A mortal man, who dares encounter heaven. 
Stern Mars attentive hears the queen complain, 
And to her hand commits the golden rein; 
She mounts the seat, oppressa__d with silent woe, 
Driven by the goddess of the painted bow. 
The lash resounds, the rapid chariot flies, 
And in a moment scales the lofty skies: 
They stoppa__d the car, and there the coursers stood, 
Fed by fair Iris with ambrosial food; 
Before her mother, lovea__s bright queen appears, 
Oa__erwhelmed with anguish, and dissolved in tears: 
She raised her in her arms, beheld her bleed, 
And aska__d what god had wrought this guilty deed? 
Illustration: VENUS, WOUNDED IN THE HAND, CONDUCTED BY IRIS TO MARS. 
VENUS, WOUNDED IN THE HAND, CONDUCTED BY IRIS TO MARS. 
Then she: a_oeThis insult from no god I found, 
An impious mortal gave the daring wound! 
Behold the deed of haughty Diomed! 
a__Twas in the sona__s defence the mother bled. 
The war with Troy no more the Grecians wage; 
But with the gods (the immortal gods) engage.a__ 
Dione then: a_oeThy wrongs with patience bear, 
And share those griefs inferior powers must share: 
[pg 094] 
Unnumbera__d woes mankind from us sustain, 
And men with woes afflict the gods again. 
The mighty Mars in mortal fetters bound,149 
And lodged in brazen dungeons underground, 
Full thirteen moons imprisona__d roara__d in vain; 
Otus and Ephialtes held the chain: 
Perhaps had perisha__d had not Hermesa__ care 
Restored the groaning god to upper air. 
Great Junoa__s self has borne her weight of pain, 
The imperial partner of the heavenly reign; 
Amphitryona__s son infixa__d the deadly dart,150 
And filla__d with anguish her immortal heart. 
Ea__en hella__s grim king Alcidesa__ power confessa__d, 
The shaft found entrance in his iron breast; 
To Jovea__s high palace for a cure he fled, 
Pierced in his own dominions of the dead; 
Where Paeon, sprinkling heavenly balm around, 
Assuaged the glowing pangs, and closed the wound. 
Rash, impious man! to stain the blessa__d abodes, 
And drench his arrows in the blood of gods! 
Illustration: OTUS AND EPHIALTES HOLDING MARS CAPTIVE. 
OTUS AND EPHIALTES HOLDING MARS CAPTIVE. 
a_oeBut thou (though Pallas urged thy frantic deed), 
Whose spear ill-fated makes a goddess bleed, 
Know thou, whoea__er with heavenly power contends, 
Short is his date, and soon his glory ends; 
From fields of death when late he shall retire, 
No infant on his knees shall call him sire. 
[pg 095] 
Strong as thou art, some god may yet be found, 
To stretch thee pale and gasping on the ground; 
Thy distant wife, A_giale the fair,151 
Starting from sleep with a distracted air, 
Shall rouse thy slaves, and her lost lord deplore, 
The brave, the great, the glorious now no more!a__ 
This said, she wiped from Venusa__ wounded palm 
The sacred ichor, and infused the balm. 
Juno and Pallas with a smile surveya__d, 
And thus to Jove began the blue-eyed maid: 
a_oePermit thy daughter, gracious Jove! to tell 
How this mischance the Cyprian queen befell, 
As late she tried with passion to inflame 
The tender bosom of a Grecian dame; 
Allured the fair, with moving thoughts of joy, 
To quit her country for some youth of Troy; 
The clasping zone, with golden buckles bound, 
Razed her soft hand with this lamented wound.a__ 
The sire of gods and men superior smiled, 
And, calling Venus, thus addressa__d his child: 
a_oeNot these, O daughter are thy proper cares, 
Thee milder arts befit, and softer wars; 
Sweet smiles are thine, and kind endearing charms; 
To Mars and Pallas leave the deeds of arms.a__ 
Thus they in heaven: while on the plain below 
The fierce Tydides charged his Dardan foe, 
Flusha__d with celestial blood pursued his way, 
And fearless dared the threatening god of day; 
Already in his hopes he saw him killa__d, 
Though screena__d behind Apolloa__s mighty shield. 
Thrice rushing furious, at the chief he strook; 
His blazing buckler thrice Apollo shook: 
He tried the fourth: when, breaking from the cloud, 
A more than mortal voice was heard aloud. 
a_oeO son of Tydeus, cease! be wise and see 
How vast the difference of the gods and thee; 
Distance immense! between the powers that shine 
Above, eternal, deathless, and divine, 
And mortal man! a wretch of humble birth, 
A short-lived reptile in the dust of earth.a__ 
So spoke the god who darts celestial fires: 
He dreads his fury, and some steps retires. 
Then Phoebus bore the chief of Venusa__ race 
To Troya__s high fane, and to his holy place; 
Latona there and Phoebe heala__d the wound, 
With vigour arma__d him, and with glory crowna__d. 
This done, the patron of the silver bow 
[pg 096] 
A phantom raised, the same in shape and show 
With great A_neas; such the form he bore, 
And such in fight the radiant arms he wore. 
Around the spectre bloody wars are waged, 
And Greece and Troy with clashing shields engaged. 
Meantime on Iliona__s tower Apollo stood, 
And calling Mars, thus urged the raging god: 
a_oeStern power of arms, by whom the mighty fall; 
Who bathest in blood, and shakest the embattled wall, 
Rise in thy wrath! to hella__s abhorra__d abodes 
Despatch yon Greek, and vindicate the gods. 
First rosy Venus felt his brutal rage; 
Me next he charged, and dares all heaven engage: 
The wretch would brave high heavena__s immortal sire, 
His triple thunder, and his bolts of fire.a__ 
The god of battle issues on the plain, 
Stirs all the ranks, and fires the Trojan train; 
In form like Acamas, the Thracian guide, 
Enraged to Troya__s retiring chiefs he cried: 
a_oeHow long, ye sons of Priam! will ye fly, 
And unrevenged see Priama__s people die? 
Still unresisted shall the foe destroy, 
And stretch the slaughter to the gates of Troy? 
Lo, brave A_neas sinks beneath his wound, 
Not godlike Hector more in arms renowna__d: 
Haste all, and take the generous warriora__s part. 
He said;a_"new courage swella__d each heroa__s heart. 
Sarpedon first his ardent soul expressa__d, 
And, turna__d to Hector, these bold words addressa__d: 
a_oeSay, chief, is all thy ancient valour lost? 
Where are thy threats, and where thy glorious boast, 
That proppa__d alone by Priama__s race should stand 
Troya__s sacred walls, nor need a foreign hand? 
Now, now thy country calls her wonted friends, 
And the proud vaunt in just derision ends. 
Remote they stand while alien troops engage, 
Like trembling hounds before the liona__s rage. 
Far distant hence I held my wide command, 
Where foaming Xanthus laves the Lycian land; 
With ample wealth (the wish of mortals) blessa__d, 
A beauteous wife, and infant at her breast; 
With those I left whatever dear could be: 
Greece, if she conquers, nothing wins from me; 
Yet first in fight my Lycian bands I cheer, 
And long to meet this mighty man ye fear; 
While Hector idle stands, nor bids the brave 
Their wives, their infants, and their altars save. 
Haste, warrior, haste! preserve thy threatena__d state, 
Or one vast burst of all-involving fate 
Full oa__er your towers shall fall, and sweep away 
[pg 097] 
Sons, sires, and wives, an undistinguisha__d prey. 
Rouse all thy Trojans, urge thy aids to fight; 
These claim thy thoughts by day, thy watch by night; 
With force incessant the brave Greeks oppose; 
Such cares thy friends deserve, and such thy foes.a__ 
Stung to the heart the generous Hector hears, 
But just reproof with decent silence bears. 
From his proud car the prince impetuous springs, 
On earth he leaps, his brazen armour rings. 
Two shining spears are brandisha__d in his hands; 
Thus arma__d, he animates his drooping bands, 
Revives their ardour, turns their steps from flight, 
And wakes anew the dying flames of fight. 
They turn, they stand; the Greeks their fury dare, 
Condense their powers, and wait the growing war. 
As when, on Ceresa__ sacred floor, the swain 
Spreads the wide fan to clear the golden grain, 
And the light chaff, before the breezes borne, 
Ascends in clouds from off the heapy corn; 
The grey dust, rising with collected winds, 
Drives oa__er the barn, and whitens all the hinds: 
So white with dust the Grecian host appears. 
From trampling steeds, and thundering charioteers; 
The dusky clouds from laboura__d earth arise, 
And roll in smoking volumes to the skies. 
Mars hovers oa__er them with his sable shield, 
And adds new horrors to the darkena__d field: 
Pleased with his charge, and ardent to fulfil, 
In Troya__s defence, Apolloa__s heavenly will: 
Soon as from fight the blue-eyed maid retires, 
Each Trojan bosom with new warmth he fires. 
And now the god, from forth his sacred fane, 
Produced A_neas to the shouting train; 
Alive, unharma__d, with all his peers around, 
Erect he stood, and vigorous from his wound: 
Inquiries none they made; the dreadful day 
No pause of words admits, no dull delay; 
Fierce Discord storms, Apollo loud exclaims, 
Fame calls, Mars thunders, and the fielda__s in flames. 
Stern Diomed with either Ajax stood, 
And great Ulysses, bathed in hostile blood. 
Embodied close, the labouring Grecian train 
The fiercest shock of charging hosts sustain. 
Unmoved and silent, the whole war they wait 
Serenely dreadful, and as fixa__d as fate. 
So when the embattled clouds in dark array, 
Along the skies their gloomy lines display; 
When now the North his boisterous rage has spent, 
And peaceful sleeps the liquid element: 
The low-hung vapours, motionless and still, 
[pg 098] 
Rest on the summits of the shaded hill; 
Till the mass scatters as the winds arise, 
Dispersed and broken through the ruffled skies. 
Nor was the general wanting to his train; 
From troop to troop he toils through all the plain, 
a_oeYe Greeks, be men! the charge of battle bear; 
Your brave associates and yourselves revere! 
Let glorious acts more glorious acts inspire, 
And catch from breast to breast the noble fire! 
On valoura__s side the odds of combat lie, 
The brave live glorious, or lamented die; 
The wretch who trembles in the field of fame, 
Meets death, and worse than death, eternal shame!a__ 
These words he seconds with his flying lance, 
To meet whose point was strong Deicoona__s chance: 
A_neasa__ friend, and in his native place 
Honoura__d and loved like Priama__s royal race: 
Long had he fought the foremost in the field, 
But now the monarcha__s lance transpierced his shield: 
His shield too weak the furious dart to stay, 
Through his broad belt the weapon forced its way: 
The grisly wound dismissa__d his soul to hell, 
His arms around him rattled as he fell. 
Then fierce A_neas, brandishing his blade, 
In dust Orsilochus and Crethon laid, 
Whose sire Diocleus, wealthy, brave and great, 
In well-built Pherae held his lofty seat:152 
Sprung from Alpheusa__ plenteous stream, that yields 
Increase of harvests to the Pylian fields. 
He got Orsilochus, Diocleus he, 
And these descended in the third degree. 
Too early expert in the martial toil, 
In sable ships they left their native soil, 
To avenge Atrides: now, untimely slain, 
They fell with glory on the Phrygian plain. 
So two young mountain lions, nursed with blood 
In deep recesses of the gloomy wood, 
Rush fearless to the plains, and uncontrolla__d 
Depopulate the stalls and waste the fold: 
Till pierced at distance from their native den, 
Oa__erpowered they fall beneath the force of men. 
Prostrate on earth their beauteous bodies lay, 
Like mountain firs, as tall and straight as they. 
Great Menelaus views with pitying eyes, 
Lifts his bright lance, and at the victor flies; 
Mars urged him on; yet, ruthless in his hate, 
The god but urged him to provoke his fate. 
He thus advancing, Nestora__s valiant son 
Shakes for his danger, and neglects his own; 
[pg 099] 
Struck with the thought, should Helena__s lord be slain, 
And all his countrya__s glorious labours vain. 
Already met, the threatening heroes stand; 
The spears already tremble in their hand: 
In rusha__d Antilochus, his aid to bring, 
And fall or conquer by the Spartan king. 
These seen, the Dardan backward turna__d his course, 
Brave as he was, and shunna__d unequal force. 
The breathless bodies to the Greeks they drew, 
Then mix in combat, and their toils renew. 
First, Pylaemenes, great in battle, bled, 
Who sheathed in brass the Paphlagonians led. 
Atrides marka__d him where sublime he stood; 
Fixa__d in his throat the javelin drank his blood. 
The faithful Mydon, as he turna__d from fight 
His flying coursers, sunk to endless night; 
A broken rock by Nestora__s son was thrown: 
His bended arm received the falling stone; 
From his numba__d hand the ivory-studded reins, 
Droppa__d in the dust, are traila__d along the plains: 
Meanwhile his temples feel a deadly wound; 
He groans in death, and ponderous sinks to ground: 
Deep drove his helmet in the sands, and there 
The head stood fixa__d, the quivering legs in air, 
Till trampled flat beneath the coursersa__ feet: 
The youthful victor mounts his empty seat, 
And bears the prize in triumph to the fleet. 
Great Hector saw, and, raging at the view, 
Pours on the Greeks: the Trojan troops pursue: 
He fires his host with animating cries, 
And brings along the furies of the skies, 
Mars, stern destroyer! and Bellona dread, 
Flame in the front, and thunder at their head: 
This swells the tumult and the rage of fight; 
That shakes a spear that casts a dreadful light. 
Where Hector marcha__d, the god of battles shined, 
Now storma__d before him, and now raged behind. 
Tydides paused amidst his full career; 
Then first the heroa__s manly breast knew fear. 
As when some simple swain his cot forsakes, 
And wide through fens an unknown journey takes: 
If chance a swelling brook his passage stay, 
And foam impervious a__cross the wanderera__s way, 
Confused he stops, a length of country passa__d, 
Eyes the rough waves, and tired, returns at last. 
Amazed no less the great Tydides stands: 
He staya__d, and turning thus addressa__d his bands: 
a_oeNo wonder, Greeks! that all to Hector yield; 
Secure of favouring gods, he takes the field; 
His strokes they second, and avert our spears. 
[pg 100] 
Behold where Mars in mortal arms appears! 
Retire then, warriors, but sedate and slow; 
Retire, but with your faces to the foe. 
Trust not too much your unavailing might; 
a__Tis not with Troy, but with the gods ye fight.a__ 
Now near the Greeks the black battalions drew; 
And first two leaders valiant Hector slew: 
His force Anchialus and Mnesthes found, 
In every art of glorious war renowna__d; 
In the same car the chiefs to combat ride, 
And fought united, and united died. 
Struck at the sight, the mighty Ajax glows 
With thirst of vengeance, and assaults the foes. 
His massy spear with matchless fury sent, 
Through Amphiusa__ belt and heaving belly went; 
Amphius Apaesusa__ happy soil possessa__d, 
With herds abounding, and with treasure blessa__d; 
But fate resistless from his country led 
The chief, to perish at his peoplea__s head. 
Shook with his fall his brazen armour rung, 
And fierce, to seize it, conquering Ajax sprung; 
Around his head an iron tempest raina__d; 
A wood of spears his ample shield sustaina__d: 
Beneath one foot the yet warm corpse he pressa__d, 
And drew his javelin from the bleeding breast: 
He could no more; the showering darts denied 
To spoil his glittering arms, and plumy pride. 
Now foes on foes came pouring on the fields, 
With bristling lances, and compacted shields; 
Till in the steely circle straitena__d round, 
Forced he gives way, and sternly quits the ground. 
While thus they strive, Tlepolemus the great,153 
Urged by the force of unresisted fate, 
Burns with desire Sarpedona__s strength to prove; 
Alcidesa__ offspring meets the son of Jove. 
Sheathed in bright arms each adverse chief came on. 
Jovea__s great descendant, and his greater son. 
Prepared for combat, ere the lance he tossa__d, 
The daring Rhodian vents his haughty boast: 
a_oeWhat brings this Lycian counsellor so far, 
To tremble at our arms, not mix in war! 
Know thy vain self, nor let their flattery move, 
Who style thee son of cloud-compelling Jove. 
How far unlike those chiefs of race divine, 
How vast the difference of their deeds and thine! 
[pg 101] 
Jove got such heroes as my sire, whose soul 
No fear could daunt, nor earth nor hell control. 
Troy felt his arm, and yon proud ramparts stand 
Raised on the ruins of his vengeful hand: 
With six small ships, and but a slender train, 
He left the town a wide-deserted plain. 
But what art thou, who deedless looka__st around, 
While unrevenged thy Lycians bite the ground! 
Small aid to Troy thy feeble force can be; 
But wert thou greater, thou must yield to me. 
Pierced by my spear, to endless darkness go! 
I make this present to the shades below.a__ 
The son of Hercules, the Rhodian guide, 
Thus haughty spoke. The Lycian king replied: 
a_oeThy sire, O prince! oa__erturna__d the Trojan state, 
Whose perjured monarch well deserved his fate; 
Those heavenly steeds the hero sought so far, 
False he detaina__d, the just reward of war. 
Nor so content, the generous chief defied, 
With base reproaches and unmanly pride. 
But you, unworthy the high race you boast, 
Shall raise my glory when thy own is lost: 
Now meet thy fate, and by Sarpedon slain, 
Add one more ghost to Plutoa__s gloomy reign.a__ 
He said: both javelins at an instant flew; 
Both struck, both wounded, but Sarpedona__s slew: 
Full in the boastera__s neck the weapon stood, 
Transfixa__d his throat, and drank the vital blood; 
The soul disdainful seeks the caves of night, 
And his seala__d eyes for ever lose the light. 
Yet not in vain, Tlepolemus, was thrown 
Thy angry lance; which piercing to the bone 
Sarpedona__s thigh, had robba__d the chief of breath; 
But Jove was present, and forbade the death. 
Borne from the conflict by his Lycian throng, 
The wounded hero dragga__d the lance along. 
(His friends, each busied in his several part, 
Through haste, or danger, had not drawn the dart.) 
The Greeks with slain Tlepolemus retired; 
Whose fall Ulysses viewa__d, with fury fired; 
Doubtful if Jovea__s great son he should pursue, 
Or pour his vengeance on the Lycian crew. 
But heaven and fate the first design withstand, 
Nor this great death must grace Ulyssesa__ hand. 
Minerva drives him on the Lycian train; 
Alastor, Cronius, Halius, strewa__d the plain, 
Alcander, Prytanis, Noemon fell:154 
And numbers more his sword had sent to hell, 
[pg 102] 
But Hector saw; and, furious at the sight, 
Rusha__d terrible amidst the ranks of fight. 
With joy Sarpedon viewa__d the wisha__d relief, 
And, faint, lamenting, thus implored the chief: 
a_oeO suffer not the foe to bear away 
My helpless corpse, an unassisted prey; 
If I, unblessa__d, must see my son no more, 
My much-loved consort, and my native shore, 
Yet let me die in Iliona__s sacred wall; 
Troy, in whose cause I fell, shall mourn my fall.a__ 
He said, nor Hector to the chief replies, 
But shakes his plume, and fierce to combat flies; 
Swift as a whirlwind, drives the scattering foes; 
And dyes the ground with purple as he goes. 
Beneath a beech, Jovea__s consecrated shade, 
His mournful friends divine Sarpedon laid: 
Brave Pelagon, his favourite chief, was nigh, 
Who wrencha__d the javelin from his sinewy thigh. 
The fainting soul stood ready winga__d for flight, 
And oa__er his eye-balls swam the shades of night; 
But Boreas rising fresh, with gentle breath, 
Recalla__d his spirit from the gates of death. 
The generous Greeks recede with tardy pace, 
Though Mars and Hector thunder in their face; 
None turn their backs to mean ignoble flight, 
Slow they retreat, and even retreating fight. 
Who first, who last, by Marsa__ and Hectora__s hand, 
Stretcha__d in their blood, lay gasping on the sand? 
Tenthras the great, Orestes the renowna__d 
For managed steeds, and Trechus pressa__d the ground;, 
Next OEnomaus and OEnopsa__ offspring died; 
Oresbius last fell groaning at their side: 
Oresbius, in his painted mitre gay, 
In fat Boeotia held his wealthy sway, 
Where lakes surround low Hylea__s watery plain; 
A prince and people studious of their gain. 
The carnage Juno from the skies surveya__d, 
And toucha__d with grief bespoke the blue-eyed maid: 
a_oeOh, sight accursed! Shall faithless Troy prevail, 
And shall our promise to our people fail? 
How vain the word to Menelaus given 
By Jovea__s great daughter and the queen of heaven, 
Beneath his arms that Priama__s towers should fall, 
If warring gods for ever guard the wall! 
Mars, red with slaughter, aids our hated foes: 
Haste, let us arm, and force with force oppose!a__ 
She spoke; Minerva burns to meet the war: 
And now heavena__s empress calls her blazing car. 
At her command rush forth the steeds divine; 
Rich with immortal gold their trappings shine. 
[pg 103] 
Bright Hebe waits; by Hebe, ever young, 
The whirling wheels are to the chariot hung. 
On the bright axle turns the bidden wheel 
Of sounding brass; the polished axle steel. 
Eight brazen spokes in radiant order flame; 
The circles gold, of uncorrupted frame, 
Such as the heavens produce: and round the gold 
Two brazen rings of work divine were rolla__d. 
The bossy naves of sold silver shone; 
Braces of gold suspend the moving throne: 
The car, behind, an arching figure bore; 
The bending concave forma__d an arch before. 
Silver the beam, the extended yoke was gold, 
And golden reins the immortal coursers hold. 
Herself, impatient, to the ready car, 
The coursers joins, and breathes revenge and war. 
Pallas disrobes; her radiant veil untied, 
With flowers adorna__d, with art diversified, 
(The laboured veil her heavenly fingers wove,) 
Flows on the pavement of the court of Jove. 
Now heavena__s dread arms her mighty limbs invest, 
Jovea__s cuirass blazes on her ample breast; 
Decka__d in sad triumph for the mournful field, 
Oa__er her broad shoulders hangs his horrid shield, 
Dire, black, tremendous! Round the margin rolla__d, 
A fringe of serpents hissing guards the gold: 
Here all the terrors of grim War appear, 
Here rages Force, here tremble Flight and Fear, 
Here storma__d Contention, and here Fury frowna__d, 
And the dire orb portentous Gorgon crowna__d. 
The massy golden helm she next assumes, 
That dreadful nods with four oa__ershading plumes; 
So vast, the broad circumference contains 
A hundred armies on a hundred plains. 
The goddess thus the imperial car ascends; 
Shook by her arm the mighty javelin bends, 
Ponderous and huge; that when her fury burns, 
Proud tyrants humbles, and whole hosts oa__erturns. 
Swift at the scourge the ethereal coursers fly, 
While the smooth chariot cuts the liquid sky. 
Heavena__s gates spontaneous open to the powers,155 
Heavena__s golden gates, kept by the winged Hours;156 
[pg 104] 
Commissiona__d in alternate watch they stand, 
The suna__s bright portals and the skies command, 
Involve in clouds the eternal gates of day, 
Or the dark barrier roll with ease away. 
The sounding hinges ring on either side 
The gloomy volumes, pierced with light, divide. 
The chariot mounts, where deep in ambient skies, 
Confused, Olympusa__ hundred heads arise; 
Where far apart the Thunderer fills his throne, 
Oa__er all the gods superior and alone. 
There with her snowy hand the queen restrains 
The fiery steeds, and thus to Jove complains: 
a_oeO sire! can no resentment touch thy soul? 
Can Mars rebel, and does no thunder roll? 
What lawless rage on yon forbidden plain, 
What rash destruction! and what heroes slain! 
Venus, and Phoebus with the dreadful bow, 
Smile on the slaughter, and enjoy my woe. 
Mad, furious power! whose unrelenting mind 
No god can govern, and no justice bind. 
Say, mighty father! shall we scourge this pride, 
And drive from fight the impetuous homicide?a__ 
To whom assenting, thus the Thunderer said: 
a_oeGo! and the great Minerva be thy aid. 
To tame the monster-god Minerva knows, 
And oft afflicts his brutal breast with woes.a__ 
He said; Saturnia, ardent to obey, 
Lasha__d her white steeds along the aerial way 
Swift down the steep of heaven the chariot rolls, 
Between the expanded earth and starry poles 
Far as a shepherd, from some point on high,157 
Oa__er the wide main extends his boundless eye, 
Through such a space of air, with thundering sound, 
At every leap the immortal coursers bound 
Troy now they reacha__d and toucha__d those banks divine, 
Where silver Simois and Scamander join 
There Juno stoppa__d, and (her fair steeds unloosed) 
Of air condensed a vapour circumfused 
For these, impregnate with celestial dew, 
On Simois, brink ambrosial herbage grew. 
Thence to relieve the fainting Argive throng, 
Smooth as the sailing doves they glide along. 
The best and bravest of the Grecian band 
(A warlike circle) round Tydides stand. 
Such was their look as lions bathed in blood, 
Or foaming boars, the terror of the wood 
[pg 105] 
Heavena__s empress mingles with the mortal crowd, 
And shouts, in Stentora__s sounding voice, aloud; 
Stentor the strong, endued with brazen lungs,158 
Whose throats surpassa__d the force of fifty tongues. 
a_oeInglorious Argives! to your race a shame, 
And only men in figure and in name! 
Once from the walls your timorous foes engaged, 
While fierce in war divine Achilles raged; 
Now issuing fearless they possess the plain, 
Now win the shores, and scarce the seas remain.a__ 
Her speech new fury to their hearts conveya__d; 
While near Tydides stood the Athenian maid; 
The king beside his panting steeds she found, 
Oa__erspent with toil reposing on the ground; 
To cool his glowing wound he sat apart, 
(The wound inflicted by the Lycian dart.) 
Large drops of sweat from all his limbs descend, 
Beneath his ponderous shield his sinews bend, 
Whose ample belt, that oa__er his shoulder lay, 
He eased; and washa__d the clotted gore away. 
The goddess leaning oa__er the bending yoke, 
Beside his coursers, thus her silence broke: 
a_oeDegenerate prince! and not of Tydeusa__ kind, 
Whose little body lodged a mighty mind; 
Foremost he pressa__d in glorious toils to share, 
And scarce refraina__d when I forbade the war. 
Alone, unguarded, once he dared to go, 
And feast, incircled by the Theban foe; 
There braved, and vanquisha__d, many a hardy knight; 
Such nerves I gave him, and such force in fight. 
Thou too no less hast been my constant care; 
Thy hands I arma__d, and sent thee forth to war: 
But thee or fear deters, or sloth detains; 
No drop of all thy father warms thy veins.a__ 
The chief thus answered mild: a_oeImmortal maid! 
I own thy presence, and confess thy aid. 
Not fear, thou knowa__st, withholds me from the plains, 
Nor sloth hath seized me, but thy word restrains: 
From warring gods thou bada__st me turn my spear, 
And Venus only found resistance here. 
Hence, goddess! heedful of thy high commands, 
Loth I gave way, and warna__d our Argive bands: 
For Mars, the homicide, these eyes beheld, 
With slaughter red, and raging round the field.a__ 
Then thus Minerva:a_"a_oeBrave Tydides, hear! 
[pg 106] 
Not Mars himself, nor aught immortal, fear. 
Full on the god impel thy foaming horse: 
Pallas commands, and Pallas lends thee force. 
Rash, furious, blind, from these to those he flies, 
And every side of wavering combat tries; 
Large promise makes, and breaks the promise made: 
Now gives the Grecians, now the Trojans aid.a__159 
She said, and to the steeds approaching near, 
Drew from his seat the martial charioteer. 
The vigorous power the trembling car ascends, 
Fierce for revenge; and Diomed attends: 
The groaning axle bent beneath the load; 
So great a hero, and so great a god. 
She snatcha__d the reins, she lasha__d with all her force, 
And full on Mars impelled the foaming horse: 
But first, to hide her heavenly visage, spread 
Black Orcusa__ helmet oa__er her radiant head. 
Illustration: DIOMED CASTING HIS SPEAR AT MARS. 
DIOMED CASTING HIS SPEAR AT MARS. 
Just then gigantic Periphas lay slain, 
The strongest warrior of the A_tolian train; 
The god, who slew him, leaves his prostrate prize 
Stretcha__d where he fell, and at Tydides flies. 
Now rushing fierce, in equal arms appear 
The daring Greek, the dreadful god of war! 
Full at the chief, above his coursera__s head, 
From Marsa__s arm the enormous weapon fled: 
Pallas opposed her hand, and caused to glance 
Far from the car the strong immortal lance. 
[pg 107] 
Then threw the force of Tydeusa__ warlike son; 
The javelin hissa__d; the goddess urged it on: 
Where the broad cincture girt his armour round, 
It pierced the god: his groin received the wound. 
From the rent skin the warrior tugs again 
The smoking steel. Mars bellows with the pain: 
Loud as the roar encountering armies yield, 
When shouting millions shake the thundering field. 
Both armies start, and trembling gaze around; 
And earth and heaven re-bellow to the sound. 
As vapours blown by Austera__s sultry breath, 
Pregnant with plagues, and shedding seeds of death, 
Beneath the rage of burning Sirius rise, 
Choke the parcha__d earth, and blacken all the skies; 
In such a cloud the god from combat driven, 
High oa__er the dusky whirlwind scales the heaven. 
Wild with his pain, he sought the bright abodes, 
There sullen sat beneath the sire of gods, 
Showa__d the celestial blood, and with a groan 
Thus poura__d his plaints before the immortal throne: 
a_oeCan Jove, supine, flagitious facts survey, 
And brook the furies of this daring day? 
For mortal men celestial powers engage, 
And gods on gods exert eternal rage: 
From thee, O father! all these ills we bear, 
And thy fell daughter with the shield and spear; 
Thou gavest that fury to the realms of light, 
Pernicious, wild, regardless of the right. 
All heaven beside reveres thy sovereign sway, 
Thy voice we hear, and thy behests obey: 
a__Tis hers to offend, and even offending share 
Thy breast, thy counsels, thy distinguisha__d care: 
So boundless she, and thou so partial grown, 
Well may we deem the wondrous birth thy own. 
Now frantic Diomed, at her command, 
Against the immortals lifts his raging hand: 
The heavenly Venus first his fury found, 
Me next encountering, me he dared to wound; 
Vanquisha__d I fled; even I, the god of fight, 
From mortal madness scarce was saved by flight. 
Else hadst thou seen me sink on yonder plain, 
Heapa__d round, and heaving under loads of slain! 
Or pierced with Grecian darts, for ages lie, 
Condemna__d to pain, though fated not to die.a__ 
Him thus upbraiding, with a wrathful look 
The lord of thunders viewa__d, and stern bespoke: 
a_oeTo me, perfidious! this lamenting strain? 
Of lawless force shall lawless Mars complain? 
Of all the gods who tread the spangled skies, 
Thou most unjust, most odious in our eyes! 
[pg 108] 
Inhuman discord is thy dire delight, 
The waste of slaughter, and the rage of fight. 
No bounds, no law, thy fiery temper quells, 
And all thy mother in thy soul rebels. 
In vain our threats, in vain our power we use; 
She gives the example, and her son pursues. 
Yet long the inflicted pangs thou shall not mourn, 
Sprung since thou art from Jove, and heavenly-born. 
Else, singed with lightning, hadst thou hence been thrown, 
Where chaina__d on burning rocks the Titans groan.a__ 
Thus he who shakes Olympus with his nod; 
Then gave to Paeona__s care the bleeding god.160 
With gentle hand the balm he poura__d around, 
And heala__d the immortal flesh, and closed the wound. 
As when the figa__s pressa__d juice, infused in cream, 
To curds coagulates the liquid stream, 
Sudden the fluids fix the parts combined; 
Such, and so soon, the ethereal texture joina__d. 
Cleansed from the dust and gore, fair Hebe dressa__d 
His mighty limbs in an immortal vest. 
Glorious he sat, in majesty restored, 
Fast by the throne of heavena__s superior lord. 
Juno and Pallas mount the blessa__d abodes, 
Their task performa__d, and mix among the gods. 
Illustration: JUNO. 
JUNO. 
[pg 109] 
BOOK VI. 
ARGUMENT. 
THE EPISODES OF GLAUCUS AND DIOMED, AND OF HECTOR AND ANDROMACHE. 
The gods having left the field, the Grecians prevail. Helenus, the 
chief augur of Troy, commands Hector to return to the city, in order to 
appoint a solemn procession of the queen and the Trojan matrons to the 
temple of Minerva, to entreat her to remove Diomed from the fight. The 
battle relaxing during the absence of Hector, Glaucus and Diomed have 
an interview between the two armies; where, coming to the knowledge, of 
the friendship and hospitality passed between their ancestors, they 
make exchange of their arms. Hector, having performed the orders of 
Helenus, prevails upon Paris to return to the battle, and, taking a 
tender leave of his wife Andromache, hastens again to the field. 
The scene is first in the field of battle, between the rivers Simois 
and Scamander, and then changes to Troy. 
Now heaven forsakes the fight: the immortals yield 
To human force and human skill the field: 
Dark showers of javelins fly from foes to foes; 
Now here, now there, the tide of combat flows; 
While Troya__s famed streams, that bound the deathful plain 
On either side, run purple to the main. 
Great Ajax first to conquest led the way, 
Broke the thick ranks, and turna__d the doubtful day. 
The Thracian Acamas his falchion found, 
And hewa__d the enormous giant to the ground; 
His thundering arm a deadly stroke impressa__d 
Where the black horse-hair nodded oa__er his crest; 
Fixa__d in his front the brazen weapon lies, 
And seals in endless shades his swimming eyes. 
Next Teuthrasa__ son distaina__d the sands with blood, 
Axylus, hospitable, rich, and good: 
In fair Arisbea__s walls (his native place)161 
He held his seat! a friend to human race. 
Fast by the road, his ever-open door 
Obliged the wealthy, and relieved the poor. 
To stern Tydides now he falls a prey, 
No friend to guard him in the dreadful day! 
[pg 110] 
Breathless the good man fell, and by his side 
His faithful servant, old Calesius died. 
By great Euryalus was Dresus slain, 
And next he laid Opheltius on the plain. 
Two twins were near, bold, beautiful, and young, 
From a fair naiad and Bucolion sprung: 
(Laomedona__s white flocks Bucolion fed, 
That monarcha__s first-born by a foreign bed; 
In secret woods he won the naiada__s grace, 
And two fair infants crowna__d his strong embrace:) 
Here dead they lay in all their youthful charms; 
The ruthless victor strippa__d their shining arms. 
Astyalus by Polypoetes fell; 
Ulyssesa__ spear Pidytes sent to hell; 
By Teucera__s shaft brave Aretaon bled, 
And Nestora__s son laid stern Ablerus dead; 
Great Agamemnon, leader of the brave, 
The mortal wound of rich Elatus gave, 
Who held in Pedasus his proud abode,162 
And tilla__d the banks where silver Satnio flowa__d. 
Melanthius by Eurypylus was slain; 
And Phylacus from Leitus flies in vain. 
Unblessa__d Adrastus next at mercy lies 
Beneath the Spartan spear, a living prize. 
Scared with the din and tumult of the fight, 
His headlong steeds, precipitate in flight, 
Rusha__d on a tamariska__s strong trunk, and broke 
The shattera__d chariot from the crooked yoke; 
Wide oa__er the field, resistless as the wind, 
For Troy they fly, and leave their lord behind. 
Prone on his face he sinks beside the wheel: 
Atrides oa__er him shakes his vengeful steel; 
The fallen chief in suppliant posture pressa__d 
The victora__s knees, and thus his prayer addressa__d: 
a_oeO spare my youth, and for the life I owe 
Large gifts of price my father shall bestow. 
When fame shall tell, that, not in battle slain, 
Thy hollow ships his captive son detain: 
Rich heaps of brass shall in thy tent be told,163 
And steel well-tempera__d, and persuasive gold.a__ 
He said: compassion toucha__d the heroa__s heart 
He stood, suspended with the lifted dart: 
As pity pleaded for his vanquisha__d prize, 
[pg 111] 
Stern Agamemnon swift to vengeance flies, 
And, furious, thus: a_oeOh impotent of mind!164 
Shall these, shall these Atridesa__ mercy find? 
Well hast thou known proud Troya__s perfidious land, 
And well her natives merit at thy hand! 
Not one of all the race, nor sex, nor age, 
Shall save a Trojan from our boundless rage: 
Ilion shall perish whole, and bury all; 
Her babes, her infants at the breast, shall fall;165 
A dreadful lesson of exampled fate, 
To warn the nations, and to curb the great!a__ 
The monarch spoke; the words, with warmth addressa__d, 
To rigid justice steela__d his brothera__s breast 
Fierce from his knees the hapless chief he thrust; 
The monarcha__s javelin stretcha__d him in the dust, 
Then pressing with his foot his panting heart, 
Forth from the slain he tugga__d the reeking dart. 
Old Nestor saw, and roused the warriora__s rage; 
a_oeThus, heroes! thus the vigorous combat wage; 
No son of Mars descend, for servile gains, 
To touch the booty, while a foe remains. 
Behold yon glittering host, your future spoil! 
First gain the conquest, then reward the toil.a__ 
And now had Greece eternal fame acquired, 
And frighted Troy within her walls, retired, 
Had not sage Helenus her state redressa__d, 
Taught by the gods that moved his sacred breast. 
Where Hector stood, with great A_neas joina__d, 
The seer reveala__d the counsels of his mind: 
a_oeYe generous chiefs! on whom the immortals lay 
The cares and glories of this doubtful day; 
On whom your aids, your countrya__s hopes depend; 
Wise to consult, and active to defend! 
Here, at our gates, your brave efforts unite, 
Turn back the routed, and forbid the flight, 
Ere yet their wivesa__ soft arms the cowards gain, 
The sport and insult of the hostile train. 
When your commands have heartena__d every band, 
Ourselves, here fixa__d, will make the dangerous stand; 
Pressa__d as we are, and sore of former fight, 
These straits demand our last remains of might. 
Meanwhile thou, Hector, to the town retire, 
[pg 112] 
And teach our mother what the gods require: 
Direct the queen to lead the assembled train 
Of Troya__s chief matrons to Minervaa__s fane;166 
Unbar the sacred gates, and seek the power, 
With offera__d vows, in Iliona__s topmost tower. 
The largest mantle her rich wardrobes hold, 
Most prized for art, and laboura__d oa__er with gold, 
Before the goddessa__ honoura__d knees be spread, 
And twelve young heifers to her altars led: 
If so the power, atoned by fervent prayer, 
Our wives, our infants, and our city spare, 
And far avert Tydidesa__ wasteful ire, 
That mows whole troops, and makes all Troy retire; 
Not thus Achilles taught our hosts to dread, 
Sprung though he was from more than mortal bed; 
Not thus resistless ruled the stream of fight, 
In rage unbounded, and unmatcha__d in might.a__ 
Hector obedient heard: and, with a bound, 
Leapa__d from his trembling chariot to the ground; 
Through all his host inspiring force he flies, 
And bids the thunder of the battle rise. 
With rage recruited the bold Trojans glow, 
And turn the tide of conflict on the foe: 
Fierce in the front he shakes two dazzling spears; 
All Greece recedes, and a__midst her triumphs fears; 
Some god, they thought, who ruled the fate of wars, 
Shot down avenging from the vault of stars. 
Then thus aloud: a_oeYe dauntless Dardans, hear! 
And you whom distant nations send to war! 
Be mindful of the strength your fathers bore; 
Be still yourselves, and Hector asks no more. 
One hour demands me in the Trojan wall, 
To bid our altars flame, and victims fall: 
Nor shall, I trust, the matronsa__ holy train, 
And reverend elders, seek the gods in vain.a__ 
This said, with ample strides the hero passa__d; 
The shielda__s large orb behind his shoulder cast, 
His neck oa__ershading, to his ankle hung; 
And as he marcha__d the brazen buckler rung. 
Now paused the battle (godlike Hector gone),167 
[pg 113] 
Where daring Glaucus and great Tydeusa__ son 
Between both armies met: the chiefs from far 
Observed each other, and had marka__d for war. 
Near as they drew, Tydides thus began: 
a_oeWhat art thou, boldest of the race of man? 
Our eyes till now that aspect nea__er beheld, 
Where fame is reapa__d amid the embattled field; 
Yet far before the troops thou dara__st appear, 
And meet a lance the fiercest heroes fear. 
Unhappy they, and born of luckless sires, 
Who tempt our fury when Minerva fires! 
But if from heaven, celestial, thou descend, 
Know with immortals we no more contend. 
Not long Lycurgus viewa__d the golden light, 
That daring man who mixa__d with gods in fight. 
Bacchus, and Bacchusa__ votaries, he drove, 
With brandisha__d steel, from Nyssaa__s sacred grove: 
Their consecrated spears lay scattera__d round, 
With curling vines and twisted ivy bound; 
While Bacchus headlong sought the briny flood, 
And Thetisa__ arms received the trembling god. 
Nor faila__d the crime the immortalsa__ wrath to move; 
(The immortals blessa__d with endless ease above;) 
Deprived of sight by their avenging doom, 
Cheerless he breathed, and wandera__d in the gloom, 
Then sunk unpitied to the dire abodes, 
A wretch accursed, and hated by the gods! 
I brave not heaven: but if the fruits of earth 
Sustain thy life, and human be thy birth, 
Bold as thou art, too prodigal of breath, 
Approach, and enter the dark gates of death.a__ 
a_oeWhat, or from whence I am, or who my sire, 
(Replied the chief,) can Tydeusa__ son inquire? 
Like leaves on trees the race of man is found, 
Now green in youth, now withering on the ground; 
Another race the following spring supplies; 
They fall successive, and successive rise: 
So generations in their course decay; 
So flourish these, when those are passa__d away. 
But if thou still persist to search my birth, 
Then hear a tale that fills the spacious earth. 
a_oeA city stands on Argosa__ utmost bound, 
(Argos the fair, for warlike steeds renowna__d,) 
Aeolian Sisyphus, with wisdom blessa__d, 
In ancient time the happy wall possessa__d, 
Then calla__d Ephyre: Glaucus was his son; 
Great Glaucus, father of Bellerophon, 
Who oa__er the sons of men in beauty shined, 
[pg 114] 
Loved for that valour which preserves mankind. 
Then mighty Praetus Argosa__ sceptre swaya__d, 
Whose hard commands Bellerophon obeya__d. 
With direful jealousy the monarch raged, 
And the brave prince in numerous toils engaged. 
For him Antaea burna__d with lawless flame, 
And strove to tempt him from the paths of fame: 
In vain she tempted the relentless youth, 
Endued with wisdom, sacred fear, and truth. 
Fired at his scorn the queen to Praetus fled, 
And begga__d revenge for her insulted bed: 
Incensed he heard, resolving on his fate; 
But hospitable laws restraina__d his hate: 
To Lycia the devoted youth he sent, 
With tablets seala__d, that told his dire intent.168 
Now blessa__d by every power who guards the good, 
The chief arrived at Xanthusa__ silver flood: 
There Lyciaa__s monarch paid him honours due, 
Nine days he feasted, and nine bulls he slew. 
But when the tenth bright morning orient glowa__d, 
The faithful youth his monarcha__s mandate showa__d: 
The fatal tablets, till that instant seala__d, 
The deathful secret to the king reveala__d. 
First, dire Chimaeraa__s conquest was enjoina__d; 
A mingled monster of no mortal kind! 
Behind, a dragona__s fiery tail was spread; 
A goata__s rough body bore a liona__s head; 
Her pitchy nostrils flaky flames expire; 
Her gaping throat emits infernal fire. 
a_oeThis pest he slaughtera__d, (for he read the skies, 
And trusted heavena__s informing prodigies,) 
Then met in arms the Solymaean crew,169 
(Fiercest of men,) and those the warrior slew; 
Next the bold Amazonsa__ whole force defied; 
And conquera__d still, for heaven was on his side. 
a_oeNor ended here his toils: his Lycian foes, 
At his return, a treacherous ambush rose, 
With levella__d spears along the winding shore: 
There fell they breathless, and returna__d no more. 
a_oeAt length the monarch, with repentant grief, 
Confessa__d the gods, and god-descended chief; 
His daughter gave, the stranger to detain, 
With half the honours of his ample reign: 
The Lycians grant a chosen space of ground, 
With woods, with vineyards, and with harvests crowna__d. 
There long the chief his happy lot possessa__d, 
With two brave sons and one fair daughter blessa__d; 
[pg 115] 
(Fair ea__en in heavenly eyes: her fruitful love 
Crowna__d with Sarpedona__s birth the embrace of Jove;) 
But when at last, distracted in his mind, 
Forsook by heaven, forsaking humankind, 
Wide oa__er the Aleian field he chose to stray, 
A long, forlorn, uncomfortable way!170 
Woes heapa__d on woes consumed his wasted heart: 
His beauteous daughter fell by Phoebea__s dart; 
His eldest born by raging Mars was slain, 
In combat on the Solymaean plain. 
Hippolochus survived: from him I came, 
The honoura__d author of my birth and name; 
By his decree I sought the Trojan town; 
By his instructions learn to win renown, 
To stand the first in worth as in command, 
To add new honours to my native land, 
Before my eyes my mighty sires to place, 
And emulate the glories of our race.a__ 
He spoke, and transport filla__d Tydidesa__ heart; 
In earth the generous warrior fixa__d his dart, 
Then friendly, thus the Lycian prince addressa__d: 
a_oeWelcome, my brave hereditary guest! 
Thus ever let us meet, with kind embrace, 
Nor stain the sacred friendship of our race. 
Know, chief, our grandsires have been guests of old; 
OEneus the strong, Bellerophon the bold: 
Our ancient seat his honoura__d presence graced, 
Where twenty days in genial rites he passa__d. 
The parting heroes mutual presents left; 
A golden goblet was thy grandsirea__s gift; 
OEneus a belt of matchless work bestowed, 
That rich with Tyrian dye refulgent glowa__d. 
(This from his pledge I learna__d, which, safely stored 
Among my treasures, still adorns my board: 
For Tydeus left me young, when Thebea__s wall 
Beheld the sons of Greece untimely fall.) 
Mindful of this, in friendship let us join; 
If heaven our steps to foreign lands incline, 
My guest in Argos thou, and I in Lycia thine. 
Enough of Trojans to this lance shall yield, 
In the full harvest of yon ample field; 
Enough of Greeks shall dye thy spear with gore; 
But thou and Diomed be foes no more. 
Now change we arms, and prove to either host 
We guard the friendship of the line we boast.a__ 
Thus having said, the gallant chiefs alight, 
Their hands they join, their mutual faith they plight; 
[pg 116] 
Brave Glaucus then each narrow thought resigna__d, 
(Jove warma__d his bosom, and enlarged his mind,) 
For Diomeda__s brass arms, of mean device, 
For which nine oxen paid, (a vulgar price,) 
He gave his own, of gold divinely wrought,171 
A hundred beeves the shining purchase bought. 
Meantime the guardian of the Trojan state, 
Great Hector, entera__d at the Scaean gate.172 
Beneath the beech-treea__s consecrated shades, 
The Trojan matrons and the Trojan maids 
Around him flocka__d, all pressa__d with pious care 
For husbands, brothers, sons, engaged in war. 
He bids the train in long procession go, 
And seek the gods, to avert the impending woe. 
And now to Priama__s stately courts he came, 
Raisa__d on archa__d columns of stupendous frame; 
Oa__er these a range of marble structure runs, 
The rich pavilions of his fifty sons, 
In fifty chambers lodged: and rooms of state,173 
Opposed to those, where Priama__s daughters sate. 
Twelve domes for them and their loved spouses shone, 
Of equal beauty, and of polisha__d stone. 
Hither great Hector passa__d, nor passa__d unseen 
Of royal Hecuba, his mother-queen. 
(With her Laodice, whose beauteous face 
Surpassa__d the nymphs of Troya__s illustrious race.) 
Long in a strict embrace she held her son, 
And pressa__d his hand, and tender thus begun: 
a_oeO Hector! say, what great occasion calls 
My son from fight, when Greece surrounds our walls; 
Coma__st thou to supplicate the almighty power 
With lifted hands, from Iliona__s lofty tower? 
Stay, till I bring the cup with Bacchus crowna__d, 
In Jovea__s high name, to sprinkle on the ground, 
And pay due vows to all the gods around. 
Then with a plenteous draught refresh thy soul, 
And draw new spirits from the generous bowl; 
Spent as thou art with long laborious fight, 
The brave defender of thy countrya__s right.a__ 
a_oeFar hence be Bacchusa__ gifts; (the chief rejoina__d;) 
Inflaming wine, pernicious to mankind, 
Unnerves the limbs, and dulls the noble mind. 
Let chiefs abstain, and spare the sacred juice 
To sprinkle to the gods, its better use. 
[pg 117] 
By me that holy office were profaned; 
Ill fits it me, with human gore distaina__d, 
To the pure skies these horrid hands to raise, 
Or offer heavena__s great Sire polluted praise. 
You, with your matrons, go! a spotless train, 
And burn rich odours in Minervaa__s fane. 
The largest mantle your full wardrobes hold, 
Most prized for art, and laboura__d oa__er with gold, 
Before the goddessa__ honoura__d knees be spread, 
And twelve young heifers to her altar led. 
So may the power, atoned by fervent prayer, 
Our wives, our infants, and our city spare; 
And far avert Tydidesa__ wasteful ire, 
Who mows whole troops, and makes all Troy retire. 
Be this, O mother, your religious care: 
I go to rouse soft Paris to the war; 
If yet not lost to all the sense of shame, 
The recreant warrior hear the voice of fame. 
Oh, would kind earth the hateful wretch embrace, 
That pest of Troy, that ruin of our race!174 
Deep to the dark abyss might he descend, 
Troy yet should flourish, and my sorrows end.a__ 
This heard, she gave command: and summona__d came 
Each noble matron and illustrious dame. 
The Phrygian queen to her rich wardrobe went, 
Where treasured odours breathed a costly scent. 
There lay the vestures of no vulgar art, 
Sidonian maids embroidera__d every part, 
Whom from soft Sidon youthful Paris bore, 
With Helen touching on the Tyrian shore. 
Here, as the queen revolved with careful eyes 
The various textures and the various dyes, 
She chose a veil that shone superior far, 
And glowa__d refulgent as the morning star. 
Herself with this the long procession leads; 
The train majestically slow proceeds. 
Soon as to Iliona__s topmost tower they come, 
And awful reach the high Palladian dome, 
Antenora__s consort, fair Theano, waits 
As Pallasa__ priestess, and unbars the gates. 
With hands uplifted and imploring eyes, 
They fill the dome with supplicating cries. 
[pg 118] 
The priestess then the shining veil displays, 
Placed on Minervaa__s knees, and thus she prays: 
a_oeOh awful goddess! ever-dreadful maid, 
Troya__s strong defence, unconquera__d Pallas, aid! 
Break thou Tydidesa__ spear, and let him fall 
Prone on the dust before the Trojan wall! 
So twelve young heifers, guiltless of the yoke, 
Shall fill thy temple with a grateful smoke. 
But thou, atoned by penitence and prayer, 
Ourselves, our infants, and our city spare!a__ 
So praya__d the priestess in her holy fane; 
So vowa__d the matrons, but they vowa__d in vain. 
While these appear before the power with prayers, 
Hector to Parisa__ lofty dome repairs.175 
Himself the mansion raised, from every part 
Assembling architects of matchless art. 
Near Priama__s court and Hectora__s palace stands 
The pompous structure, and the town commands. 
A spear the hero bore of wondrous strength, 
Of full ten cubits was the lancea__s length, 
The steely point with golden ringlets joina__d, 
Before him brandisha__d, at each motion shined 
Thus entering, in the glittering rooms he found 
His brother-chief, whose useless arms lay round, 
His eyes delighting with their splendid show, 
Brightening the shield, and polishing the bow. 
Beside him Helen with her virgins stands, 
Guides their rich labours, and instructs their hands. 
Him thus inactive, with an ardent look 
The prince beheld, and high-resenting spoke. 
a_oeThy hate to Troy, is this the time to show? 
(O wretch ill-fated, and thy countrya__s foe!) 
Paris and Greece against us both conspire, 
Thy close resentment, and their vengeful ire. 
For thee great Iliona__s guardian heroes fall, 
Till heaps of dead alone defend her wall, 
For thee the soldier bleeds, the matron mourns, 
And wasteful war in all its fury burns. 
Ungrateful man! deserves not this thy care, 
Our troops to hearten, and our toils to share? 
Rise, or behold the conquering flames ascend, 
And all the Phrygian glories at an end.a__ 
a_oeBrother, a__tis just, (replied the beauteous youth,) 
[pg 119] 
Thy free remonstrance proves thy worth and truth: 
Yet charge my absence less, O generous chief! 
On hate to Troy, than conscious shame and grief: 
Here, hid from human eyes, thy brother sate, 
And mourna__d, in secret, his and Iliona__s fate. 
a__Tis now enough; now glory spreads her charms, 
And beauteous Helen calls her chief to arms. 
Conquest to-day my happier sword may bless, 
a__Tis mana__s to fight, but heavena__s to give success. 
But while I arm, contain thy ardent mind; 
Or go, and Paris shall not lag behind.a__ 
Illustration: HECTOR CHIDING PARIS. 
HECTOR CHIDING PARIS. 
He said, nor answera__d Priama__s warlike son; 
When Helen thus with lowly grace begun: 
a_oeOh, generous brother! (if the guilty dame 
That caused these woes deserve a sistera__s name!) 
Would heaven, ere all these dreadful deeds were done, 
The day that showa__d me to the golden sun 
Had seen my death! why did not whirlwinds bear 
The fatal infant to the fowls of air? 
Why sunk I not beneath the whelming tide, 
And midst the roarings of the waters died? 
Heaven filla__d up all my ills, and I accursed 
Bore all, and Paris of those ills the worst. 
Helen at least a braver spouse might claim, 
Warma__d with some virtue, some regard of fame! 
Now tired with toils, thy fainting limbs recline, 
With toils, sustaina__d for Parisa__ sake and mine 
The gods have linka__d our miserable doom, 
Our present woe, and infamy to come: 
[pg 120] 
Wide shall it spread, and last through ages long, 
Example sad! and theme of future song.a__ 
The chief replied: a_oeThis time forbids to rest; 
The Trojan bands, by hostile fury pressa__d, 
Demand their Hector, and his arm require; 
The combat urges, and my soula__s on fire. 
Urge thou thy knight to march where glory calls, 
And timely join me, ere I leave the walls. 
Ere yet I mingle in the direful fray, 
My wife, my infant, claim a momenta__s stay; 
This day (perhaps the last that sees me here) 
Demands a parting word, a tender tear: 
This day, some god who hates our Trojan land 
May vanquish Hector by a Grecian hand.a__ 
He said, and passa__d with sad presaging heart 
To seek his spouse, his soula__s far dearer part; 
At home he sought her, but he sought in vain; 
She, with one maid of all her menial train, 
Had hence retired; and with her second joy, 
The young Astyanax, the hope of Troy, 
Pensive she stood on Iliona__s towery height, 
Beheld the war, and sickena__d at the sight; 
There her sad eyes in vain her lord explore, 
Or weep the wounds her bleeding country bore. 
But he who found not whom his soul desired, 
Whose virtue charma__d him as her beauty fired, 
Stood in the gates, and aska__d a_oewhat way she bent 
Her parting step? If to the fane she went, 
Where late the mourning matrons made resort; 
Or sought her sisters in the Trojan court?a__ 
a_oeNot to the court, (replied the attendant train,) 
Nor mixa__d with matrons to Minervaa__s fane: 
To Iliona__s steepy tower she bent her way, 
To mark the fortunes of the doubtful day. 
Troy fled, she heard, before the Grecian sword; 
She heard, and trembled for her absent lord: 
Distracted with surprise, she seema__d to fly, 
Fear on her cheek, and sorrow m her eye. 
The nurse attended with her infant boy, 
The young Astyanax, the hope of Troy.a__ 
Hector this heard, returna__d without delay; 
Swift through the town he trod his former way, 
Through streets of palaces, and walks of state; 
And met the mourner at the Scaean gate. 
With haste to meet him sprung the joyful fair. 
His blameless wife, Aetiona__s wealthy heir: 
(Cilician Thebe great Aetion swaya__d, 
And Hippoplacusa__ wide extended shade:) 
The nurse stood near, in whose embraces pressa__d, 
His only hope hung smiling at her breast, 
[pg 121] 
Whom each soft charm and early grace adorn, 
Fair as the new-born star that gilds the morn. 
To this loved infant Hector gave the name 
Scamandrius, from Scamandera__s honoura__d stream; 
Astyanax the Trojans calla__d the boy, 
From his great father, the defence of Troy. 
Silent the warrior smiled, and pleased resigna__d 
To tender passions all his mighty mind; 
His beauteous princess cast a mournful look, 
Hung on his hand, and then dejected spoke; 
Her bosom laboured with a boding sigh, 
And the big tear stood trembling in her eye. 
Illustration: THE MEETING OF HECTOR AND ANDROMACHE. 
THE MEETING OF HECTOR AND ANDROMACHE. 
a_oeToo daring prince! ah, whither dost thou run? 
Ah, too forgetful of thy wife and son! 
And thinka__st thou not how wretched we shall be, 
A widow I, a helpless orphan he? 
For sure such courage length of life denies, 
And thou must fall, thy virtuea__s sacrifice. 
Greece in her single heroes strove in vain; 
Now hosts oppose thee, and thou must be slain. 
O grant me, gods, ere Hector meets his doom, 
All I can ask of heaven, an early tomb! 
So shall my days in one sad tenor run, 
And end with sorrows as they first begun. 
No parent now remains my griefs to share, 
No fathera__s aid, no mothera__s tender care. 
The fierce Achilles wrapt our walls in fire, 
Laid Thebe waste, and slew my warlike sire! 
[pg 122] 
His fate compassion in the victor bred; 
Stern as he was, he yet revered the dead, 
His radiant arms preserved from hostile spoil, 
And laid him decent on the funeral pile; 
Then raised a mountain where his bones were burna__d, 
The mountain-nymphs the rural tomb adorna__d, 
Jovea__s sylvan daughters bade their elms bestow 
A barren shade, and in his honour grow. 
a_oeBy the same arm my seven brave brothers fell; 
In one sad day beheld the gates of hell; 
While the fat herds and snowy flocks they fed, 
Amid their fields the hapless heroes bled! 
My mother lived to wear the victora__s bands, 
The queen of Hippoplaciaa__s sylvan lands: 
Redeema__d too late, she scarce beheld again 
Her pleasing empire and her native plain, 
When ah! oppressa__d by life-consuming woe, 
She fell a victim to Dianaa__s bow. 
a_oeYet while my Hector still survives, I see 
My father, mother, brethren, all, in thee: 
Alas! my parents, brothers, kindred, all 
Once more will perish, if my Hector fall, 
Thy wife, thy infant, in thy danger share: 
Oh, prove a husbanda__s and a fathera__s care! 
That quarter most the skilful Greeks annoy, 
Where yon wild fig-trees join the wall of Troy; 
Thou, from this tower defend the important post; 
There Agamemnon points his dreadful host, 
That pass Tydides, Ajax, strive to gain, 
And there the vengeful Spartan fires his train. 
Thrice our bold foes the fierce attack have given, 
Or led by hopes, or dictated from heaven. 
Let others in the field their arms employ, 
But stay my Hector here, and guard his Troy.a__ 
The chief replied: a_oeThat post shall be my care, 
Not that alone, but all the works of war. 
How would the sons of Troy, in arms renowna__d, 
And Troya__s proud dames, whose garments sweep the ground 
Attaint the lustre of my former name, 
Should Hector basely quit the field of fame? 
My early youth was bred to martial pains, 
My soul impels me to the embattled plains! 
Let me be foremost to defend the throne, 
And guard my fathera__s glories, and my own. 
a_oeYet come it will, the day decreed by fates! 
(How my heart trembles while my tongue relates!) 
The day when thou, imperial Troy! must bend, 
And see thy warriors fall, thy glories end. 
And yet no dire presage so wounds my mind, 
My mothera__s death, the ruin of my kind, 
[pg 123] 
Not Priama__s hoary hairs defiled with gore, 
Not all my brothers gasping on the shore; 
As thine, Andromache! Thy griefs I dread: 
I see thee trembling, weeping, captive led! 
In Argive looms our battles to design, 
And woes, of which so large a part was thine! 
To bear the victora__s hard commands, or bring 
The weight of waters from Hyperiaa__s spring. 
There while you groan beneath the load of life, 
They cry, a__Behold the mighty Hectora__s wife!a__ 
Some haughty Greek, who lives thy tears to see, 
Imbitters all thy woes, by naming me. 
The thoughts of glory past, and present shame, 
A thousand griefs shall waken at the name! 
May I lie cold before that dreadful day, 
Pressa__d with a load of monumental clay! 
Thy Hector, wrapt in everlasting sleep, 
Shall neither hear thee sigh, nor see thee weep.a__ 
Thus having spoke, the illustrious chief of Troy 
Stretcha__d his fond arms to clasp the lovely boy. 
The babe clung crying to his nursea__s breast, 
Scared at the dazzling helm, and nodding crest. 
With secret pleasure each fond parent smiled, 
And Hector hasted to relieve his child, 
The glittering terrors from his brows unbound, 
And placed the beaming helmet on the ground; 
Then kissa__d the child, and, lifting high in air, 
Thus to the gods preferra__d a fathera__s prayer: 
a_oeO thou! whose glory fills the ethereal throne, 
And all ye deathless powers! protect my son! 
Grant him, like me, to purchase just renown, 
To guard the Trojans, to defend the crown, 
Against his countrya__s foes the war to wage, 
And rise the Hector of the future age! 
So when triumphant from successful toils 
Of heroes slain he bears the reeking spoils, 
Whole hosts may hail him with deserved acclaim, 
And say, a__This chief transcends his fathera__s fame:a__ 
While pleased amidst the general shouts of Troy, 
His mothera__s conscious heart oa__erflows with joy.a__ 
He spoke, and fondly gazing on her charms, 
Restored the pleasing burden to her arms; 
Soft on her fragrant breast the babe she laid, 
Husha__d to repose, and with a smile surveya__d. 
The troubled pleasure soon chastised by fear, 
She mingled with a smile a tender tear. 
The softena__d chief with kind compassion viewa__d, 
And dried the falling drops, and thus pursued: 
a_oeAndromache! my soula__s far better part, 
Why with untimely sorrows heaves thy heart? 
[pg 124] 
No hostile hand can antedate my doom, 
Till fate condemns me to the silent tomb. 
Fixa__d is the term to all the race of earth; 
And such the hard condition of our birth: 
No force can then resist, no flight can save, 
All sink alike, the fearful and the brave. 
No morea_"but hasten to thy tasks at home, 
There guide the spindle, and direct the loom: 
Me glory summons to the martial scene, 
The field of combat is the sphere for men. 
Where heroes war, the foremost place I claim, 
The first in danger as the first in fame.a__ 
Thus having said, the glorious chief resumes 
His towery helmet, black with shading plumes. 
His princess parts with a prophetic sigh, 
Unwilling parts, and oft reverts her eye 
That streama__d at every look; then, moving slow, 
Sought her own palace, and indulged her woe. 
There, while her tears deplored the godlike man, 
Through all her train the soft infection ran; 
The pious maids their mingled sorrows shed, 
And mourn the living Hector, as the dead. 
But now, no longer deaf to honoura__s call, 
Forth issues Paris from the palace wall. 
In brazen arms that cast a gleamy ray, 
Swift through the town the warrior bends his way. 
The wanton courser thus with reins unbound176 
Breaks from his stall, and beats the trembling ground; 
Pampera__d and proud, he seeks the wonted tides, 
And laves, in height of blood his shining sides; 
His head now freed, he tosses to the skies; 
His mane dishevella__d oa__er his shoulders flies; 
He snuffs the females in the distant plain, 
And springs, exulting, to his fields again. 
With equal triumph, sprightly, bold, and gay, 
In arms refulgent as the god of day, 
The son of Priam, glorying in his might, 
Rusha__d forth with Hector to the fields of fight. 
And now, the warriors passing on the way, 
The graceful Paris first excused his stay. 
To whom the noble Hector thus replied: 
a_oeO chief! in blood, and now in arms, allied! 
Thy power in war with justice none contest; 
Known is thy courage, and thy strength confessa__d. 
What pity sloth should seize a soul so brave, 
[pg 125] 
Or godlike Paris live a womana__s slave! 
My heart weeps blood at what the Trojans say, 
And hopes thy deeds shall wipe the stain away. 
Haste then, in all their glorious labours share, 
For much they suffer, for thy sake, in war. 
These ills shall cease, whenea__er by Jovea__s decree 
We crown the bowl to heaven and liberty: 
While the proud foe his frustrate triumphs mourns, 
And Greece indignant through her seas returns.a__ 
Illustration: BOWS AND BOW CASE. 
BOWS AND BOW CASE. 
[pg 126] 
Illustration: IRIS. 
IRIS. 
[pg 127] 
BOOK VII. 
ARGUMENT 
THE SINGLE COMBAT OF HECTOR AND AJAX. 
The battle renewing with double ardour upon the return of Hector, 
Minerva is under apprehensions for the Greeks. Apollo, seeing her 
descend from Olympus, joins her near the Scaean gate. They agree to put 
off the general engagement for that day, and incite Hector to challenge 
the Greeks to a single combat. Nine of the princes accepting the 
challenge, the lot is cast and falls upon Ajax. These heroes, after 
several attacks, are parted by the night. The Trojans calling a 
council, Antenor purposes the delivery of Helen to the Greeks, to which 
Paris will not consent, but offers to restore them her riches. Priam 
sends a herald to make this offer, and to demand a truce for burning 
the dead, the last of which only is agreed to by Agamemnon. When the 
funerals are performed, the Greeks, pursuant to the advice of Nestor, 
erect a fortification to protect their fleet and camp, flanked with 
towers, and defended by a ditch and palisades. Neptune testifies his 
jealousy at this work, but is pacified by a promise from Jupiter. Both 
armies pass the night in feasting but Jupiter disheartens the Trojans 
with thunder, and other signs of his wrath. 
The three and twentieth day ends with the duel of Hector and Ajax, the 
next day the truce is agreed; another is taken up in the funeral rites 
of the slain and one more in building the fortification before the 
ships. So that somewhat about three days is employed in this book. The 
scene lies wholly in the field. 
So spoke the guardian of the Trojan state, 
Then rusha__d impetuous through the Scaean gate. 
Him Paris followa__d to the dire alarms; 
Both breathing slaughter, both resolved in arms. 
As when to sailors labouring through the main, 
That long have heaved the weary oar in vain, 
Jove bids at length the expected gales arise; 
The gales blow grateful, and the vessel flies. 
So welcome these to Troya__s desiring train, 
The bands are cheera__d, the war awakes again. 
Bold Paris first the work of death begun 
On great Menestheus, Areithousa__ son, 
Sprung from the fair Philomedaa__s embrace, 
The pleasing Arne was his native place. 
Then sunk Eioneus to the shades below, 
Beneath his steely casque he felt the blow177 
[pg 128] 
Full on his neck, from Hectora__s weighty hand; 
And rolla__d, with limbs relaxa__d, along the land. 
By Glaucusa__ spear the bold Iphmous bleeds, 
Fixa__d in the shoulder as he mounts his steeds; 
Headlong he tumbles: his slack nerves unbound, 
Drop the cold useless members on the ground. 
When now Minerva saw her Argives slain, 
From vast Olympus to the gleaming plain 
Fierce she descends: Apollo marked her flight, 
Nor shot less swift from Iliona__s towery height. 
Radiant they met, beneath the beechen shade; 
When thus Apollo to the blue-eyed maid: 
a_oeWhat cause, O daughter of Almighty Jove! 
Thus wings thy progress from the realms above? 
Once more impetuous dost thou bend thy way, 
To give to Greece the long divided day? 
Too much has Troy already felt thy hate, 
Now breathe thy rage, and hush the stern debate; 
This day, the business of the field suspend; 
War soon shall kindle, and great Ilion bend; 
Since vengeful goddesses confederate join 
To raze her walls, though built by hands divine.a__ 
To whom the progeny of Jove replies: 
a_oeI left, for this, the council of the skies: 
But who shall bid conflicting hosts forbear, 
What art shall calm the furious sons of war?a__ 
To her the god: a_oeGreat Hectora__s soul incite 
To dare the boldest Greek to single fight, 
Till Greece, provoked, from all her numbers show 
A warrior worthy to be Hectora__s foe.a__ 
At this agreed, the heavenly powers withdrew; 
Sage Helenus their secret counsels knew; 
Hector, inspired, he sought: to him addressa__d, 
Thus told the dictates of his sacred breast: 
a_oeO son of Priam! let thy faithful ear 
Receive my words: thy friend and brother hear! 
Go forth persuasive, and a while engage 
The warring nations to suspend their rage; 
Then dare the boldest of the hostile train 
To mortal combat on the listed plain. 
For not this day shall end thy glorious date; 
The gods have spoke it, and their voice is fate.a__ 
He said: the warrior heard the word with joy; 
Then with his spear restraina__d the youth of Troy, 
Held by the midst athwart. On either hand 
The squadrons part; the expecting Trojans stand; 
Great Agamemnon bids the Greeks forbear: 
They breathe, and hush the tumult of the war. 
The Athenian maid, and glorious god of day,178 
[pg 129] 
With silent joy the settling hosts survey: 
In form of vultures, on the beecha__s height 
They sit conceala__d, and wait the future fight. 
The thronging troops obscure the dusky fields, 
Horrid with bristling spears, and gleaming shields. 
As when a general darkness veils the main, 
(Soft Zephyr curling the wide wata__ry plain,) 
The waves scarce heave, the face of ocean sleeps, 
And a still horror saddens all the deeps; 
Thus in thick orders settling wide around, 
At length composed they sit, and shade the ground. 
Great Hector first amidst both armies broke 
The solemn silence, and their powers bespoke: 
a_oeHear, all ye Trojan, all ye Grecian bands, 
What my soul prompts, and what some god commands. 
Great Jove, averse our warfare to compose, 
Oa__erwhelms the nations with new toils and woes; 
War with a fiercer tide once more returns, 
Till Ilion falls, or till yon navy burns. 
You then, O princes of the Greeks! appear; 
a__Tis Hector speaks, and calls the gods to hear: 
From all your troops select the boldest knight, 
And him, the boldest, Hector dares to fight. 
Here if I fall, by chance of battle slain, 
Be his my spoil, and his these arms remain; 
But let my body, to my friends returna__d, 
By Trojan hands and Trojan flames be burna__d. 
And if Apollo, in whose aid I trust, 
Shall stretch your daring champion in the dust; 
If mine the glory to despoil the foe; 
On Phoebusa__ temple Ia__ll his arms bestow: 
The breathless carcase to your navy sent, 
Greece on the shore shall raise a monument; 
Which when some future mariner surveys, 
Washa__d by broad Hellesponta__s resounding seas, 
Thus shall he say, a__A valiant Greek lies there, 
By Hector slain, the mighty man of war,a__ 
The stone shall tell your vanquisha__d heroa__s name. 
And distant ages learn the victora__s fame.a__ 
This fierce defiance Greece astonisha__d heard, 
Blusha__d to refuse, and to accept it feara__d. 
Stern Menelaus first the silence broke, 
And, inly groaning, thus opprobrious spoke: 
a_oeWomen of Greece! O scandal of your race, 
Whose coward souls your manly form disgrace, 
How great the shame, when every age shall know 
That not a Grecian met this noble foe! 
Go then! resolve to earth, from whence ye grew, 
A heartless, spiritless, inglorious crew! 
Be what ye seem, unanimated clay, 
[pg 130] 
Myself will dare the danger of the day; 
a__Tis mana__s bold task the generous strife to try, 
But in the hands of God is victory.a__ 
These words scarce spoke, with generous ardour pressa__d, 
His manly limbs in azure arms he dressa__d. 
That day, Atrides! a superior hand 
Had stretcha__d thee breathless on the hostile strand; 
But all at once, thy fury to compose, 
The kings of Greece, an awful band, arose; 
Even he their chief, great Agamemnon, pressa__d 
Thy daring hand, and this advice addressa__d: 
a_oeWhither, O Menelaus! wouldst thou run, 
And tempt a fate which prudence bids thee shun? 
Grieved though thou art, forbear the rash design; 
Great Hectors arm is mightier far than thine: 
Even fierce Achilles learna__d its force to fear, 
And trembling met this dreadful son of war. 
Sit thou secure, amidst thy social band; 
Greece in our cause shall arm some powerful hand. 
The mightiest warrior of the Achaian name, 
Though bold and burning with desire of fame, 
Content the doubtful honour might forego, 
So great the danger, and so brave the foe.a__ 
He said, and turna__d his brothera__s vengeful mind; 
He stoopa__d to reason, and his rage resigna__d, 
No longer bent to rush on certain harms; 
His joyful friends unbrace his azure arms. 
He from whose lips divine persuasion flows, 
Grave Nestor, then, in graceful act arose; 
Thus to the kings he spoke: a_oeWhat grief, what shame 
Attend on Greece, and all the Grecian name! 
How shall, alas! her hoary heroes mourn 
Their sons degenerate, and their race a scorn! 
What tears shall down thy silvery beard be rolla__d, 
O Peleus, old in arms, in wisdom old! 
Once with what joy the generous prince would hear 
Of every chief who fought this glorious war, 
Participate their fame, and pleased inquire 
Each name, each action, and each heroa__s sire! 
Gods! should he see our warriors trembling stand, 
And trembling all before one hostile hand; 
How would he lift his aged arms on high, 
Lament inglorious Greece, and beg to die! 
Oh! would to all the immortal powers above, 
Minerva, Phoebus, and almighty Jove! 
Years might again roll back, my youth renew, 
And give this arm the spring which once it knew 
When fierce in war, where Jardana__s waters fall, 
I led my troops to Pheaa__s trembling wall, 
And with the Arcadian spears my prowess tried, 
[pg 131] 
Where Celadon rolls down his rapid tide.179 
There Ereuthalion braved us in the field, 
Proud Areithousa__ dreadful arms to wield; 
Great Areithous, known from shore to shore 
By the huge, knotted, iron mace he bore; 
No lance he shook, nor bent the twanging bow, 
But broke, with this, the battle of the foe. 
Him not by manly force Lycurgus slew, 
Whose guileful javelin from the thicket flew, 
Deep in a winding way his breast assailed, 
Nor aught the warriora__s thundering mace availa__d. 
Supine he fell: those arms which Mars before 
Had given the vanquisha__d, now the victor bore: 
But when old age had dimma__d Lycurgusa__ eyes, 
To Ereuthalion he consigna__d the prize. 
Furious with this he crusha__d our levella__d bands, 
And dared the trial of the strongest hands; 
Nor could the strongest hands his fury stay: 
All saw, and feara__d, his huge tempestuous sway 
Till I, the youngest of the host, appeara__d, 
And, youngest, met whom all our army feara__d. 
I fought the chief: my arms Minerva crowna__d: 
Prone fell the giant oa__er a length of ground. 
What then I was, O were your Nestor now! 
Not Hectora__s self should want an equal foe. 
But, warriors, you that youthful vigour boast, 
The flower of Greece, the examples of our host, 
Sprung from such fathers, who such numbers sway, 
Can you stand trembling, and desert the day?a__ 
His warm reproofs the listening kings inflame; 
And nine, the noblest of the Grecian name, 
Up-started fierce: but far before the rest 
The king of men advanced his dauntless breast: 
Then bold Tydides, great in arms, appeara__d; 
And next his bulk gigantic Ajax reara__d; 
Oileus followa__d; Idomen was there,180 
And Merion, dreadful as the god of war: 
With these Eurypylus and Thoas stand, 
And wise Ulysses closed the daring band. 
All these, alike inspired with noble rage, 
Demand the fight. To whom the Pylian sage: 
a_oeLest thirst of glory your brave souls divide, 
What chief shall combat, let the gods decide. 
Whom heaven shall choose, be his the chance to raise 
His countrya__s fame, his own immortal praise.a__ 
The lots produced, each hero signs his own: 
Then in the generala__s helm the fates are thrown,181 
[pg 132] 
The people pray, with lifted eyes and hands, 
And vows like these ascend from all the bands: 
a_oeGrant, thou Almighty! in whose hand is fate, 
A worthy champion for the Grecian state: 
This task let Ajax or Tydides prove, 
Or he, the king of kings, beloved by Jove.a__ 
Old Nestor shook the casque. By heaven inspired, 
Leapa__d forth the lot, of every Greek desired. 
This from the right to left the herald bears, 
Held out in order to the Grecian peers; 
Each to his rival yields the mark unknown, 
Till godlike Ajax finds the lot his own; 
Surveys the inscription with rejoicing eyes, 
Then casts before him, and with transport cries: 
a_oeWarriors! I claim the lot, and arm with joy; 
Be mine the conquest of this chief of Troy. 
Now while my brightest arms my limbs invest, 
To Saturna__s son be all your vows addressa__d: 
But pray in secret, lest the foes should hear, 
And deem your prayers the mean effect of fear. 
Said I in secret? No, your vows declare 
In such a voice as fills the earth and air, 
Lives there a chief whom Ajax ought to dread? 
Ajax, in all the toils of battle bred! 
From warlike Salamis I drew my birth, 
And, born to combats, fear no force on earth.a__ 
He said. The troops with elevated eyes, 
Implore the god whose thunder rends the skies: 
a_oeO father of mankind, superior lord! 
On lofty Idaa__s holy hill adored: 
Who in the highest heaven hast fixa__d thy throne, 
Supreme of gods! unbounded and alone: 
Grant thou, that Telamon may bear away 
The praise and conquest of this doubtful day; 
Or, if illustrious Hector be thy care, 
That both may claim it, and that both may share.a__ 
Now Ajax braced his dazzling armour on; 
Sheathed in bright steel the giant-warrior shone: 
He moves to combat with majestic pace; 
So stalks in arms the grisly god of Thrace,182 
When Jove to punish faithless men prepares, 
And gives whole nations to the waste of wars, 
Thus marcha__d the chief, tremendous as a god; 
Grimly he smiled; earth trembled as he strode:183 
[pg 133] 
His massy javelin quivering in his hand, 
He stood, the bulwark of the Grecian band. 
Through every Argive heart new transport ran; 
All Troy stood trembling at the mighty man: 
Even Hector paused; and with new doubt oppressa__d, 
Felt his great heart suspended in his breast: 
a__Twas vain to seek retreat, and vain to fear; 
Himself had challenged, and the foe drew near. 
Stern Telamon behind his ample shield, 
As from a brazen tower, oa__erlooka__d the field. 
Huge was its orb, with seven thick folds oa__ercast, 
Of tough bull-hides; of solid brass the last, 
(The work of Tychius, who in Hyle dwella__d 
And in all arts of armoury excella__d,) 
This Ajax bore before his manly breast, 
And, threatening, thus his adverse chief addressa__d: 
a_oeHector! approach my arm, and singly know 
What strength thou hast, and what the Grecian foe. 
Achilles shuns the fight; yet some there are, 
Not void of soul, and not unskilla__d in war: 
Let him, unactive on the sea-beat shore, 
Indulge his wrath, and aid our arms no more; 
Whole troops of heroes Greece has yet to boast, 
And sends thee one, a sample of her host, 
Such as I am, I come to prove thy might; 
No morea_"be sudden, and begin the fight.a__ 
a_oeO son of Telamon, thy countrya__s pride! 
(To Ajax thus the Trojan prince replied) 
Me, as a boy, or woman, wouldst thou fright, 
New to the field, and trembling at the fight? 
Thou meeta__st a chief deserving of thy arms, 
To combat born, and bred amidst alarms: 
I know to shift my ground, remount the car, 
Turn, charge, and answer every call of war; 
To right, to left, the dexterous lance I wield, 
And bear thick battle on my sounding shield 
But open be our fight, and bold each blow; 
I steal no conquest from a noble foe.a__ 
He said, and rising, high above the field 
Whirla__d the long lance against the sevenfold shield. 
Full on the brass descending from above 
Through six bull-hides the furious weapon drove, 
Till in the seventh it fixa__d. Then Ajax threw; 
Through Hectora__s shield the forceful javelin flew, 
His corslet enters, and his garment rends, 
And glancing downwards, near his flank descends. 
The wary Trojan shrinks, and bending low 
Beneath his buckler, disappoints the blow. 
From their bored shields the chiefs their javelins drew, 
Then close impetuous, and the charge renew; 
[pg 134] 
Fierce as the mountain-lions bathed in blood, 
Or foaming boars, the terror of the wood. 
At Ajax, Hector his long lance extends; 
The blunted point against the buckler bends; 
But Ajax, watchful as his foe drew near, 
Drove through the Trojan targe the knotty spear; 
It reacha__d his neck, with matchless strength impella__d! 
Spouts the black gore, and dims his shining shield. 
Yet ceased not Hector thus; but stooping down, 
In his strong hand up-heaved a flinty stone, 
Black, craggy, vast: to this his force he bends; 
Full on the brazen boss the stone descends; 
The hollow brass resounded with the shock: 
Then Ajax seized the fragment of a rock, 
Applied each nerve, and swinging round on high, 
With force tempestuous, let the ruin fly; 
The huge stone thundering through his buckler broke: 
His slackena__d knees received the numbing stroke; 
Great Hector falls extended on the field, 
His bulk supporting on the shattera__d shield: 
Nor wanted heavenly aid: Apolloa__s might 
Confirma__d his sinews, and restored to fight. 
And now both heroes their broad falchions drew 
In flaming circles round their heads they flew; 
But then by heraldsa__ voice the word was given. 
The sacred ministers of earth and heaven: 
Divine Talthybius, whom the Greeks employ. 
And sage Idaeus on the part of Troy, 
[pg 135] 
Between the swords their peaceful sceptres reara__d; 
And first Idaeusa__ awful voice was heard: 
Illustration: HECTOR AND AJAX SEPARATED BY THE HERALDS. 
HECTOR AND AJAX SEPARATED BY THE HERALDS. 
a_oeForbear, my sons! your further force to prove, 
Both dear to men, and both beloved of Jove. 
To either host your matchless worth is known, 
Each sounds your praise, and war is all your own. 
But now the Night extends her awful shade; 
The goddess parts you; be the night obeya__d.a__184 
To whom great Ajax his high soul expressa__d: 
a_oeO sage! to Hector be these words addressa__d. 
Let him, who first provoked our chiefs to fight, 
Let him demand the sanction of the night; 
If first he aska__d it, I content obey, 
And cease the strife when Hector shows the way.a__ 
a_oeO first of Greeks! (his noble foe rejoina__d) 
Whom heaven adorns, superior to thy kind, 
With strength of body, and with worth of mind! 
Now martial law commands us to forbear; 
Hereafter we shall meet in glorious war, 
Some future day shall lengthen out the strife, 
And let the gods decide of death or life! 
Since, then, the night extends her gloomy shade, 
And heaven enjoins it, be the night obeya__d. 
Return, brave Ajax, to thy Grecian friends, 
And joy the nations whom thy arm defends; 
As I shall glad each chief, and Trojan wife, 
Who wearies heaven with vows for Hectora__s life. 
But let us, on this memorable day, 
Exchange some gift: that Greece and Troy may say, 
a__Not hate, but glory, made these chiefs contend; 
And each brave foe was in his soul a friend.a__a__ 
With that, a sword with stars of silver graced, 
The baldric studded, and the sheath enchased, 
He gave the Greek. The generous Greek bestowa__d 
A radiant belt that rich with purple glowa__d. 
Then with majestic grace they quit the plain; 
This seeks the Grecian, that the Phrygian train. 
The Trojan bands returning Hector wait, 
And hail with joy the Champion of their state; 
Escaped great Ajax, they survey him round, 
Alive, unarma__d, and vigorous from his wound; 
To Troya__s high gates the godlike man they bear 
Their present triumph, as their late despair. 
But Ajax, glorying in his hardy deed, 
The well-arma__d Greeks to Agamemnon lead. 
A steer for sacrifice the king designa__d, 
[pg 136] 
Of full five years, and of the nobler kind. 
The victim falls; they strip the smoking hide, 
The beast they quarter, and the joints divide; 
Then spread the tables, the repast prepare, 
Each takes his seat, and each receives his share. 
The king himself (an honorary sign) 
Before great Ajax placed the mighty chine.185 
When now the rage of hunger was removed, 
Nestor, in each persuasive art approved, 
The sage whose counsels long had swaya__d the rest, 
In words like these his prudent thought expressa__d: 
a_oeHow dear, O kings! this fatal day has cost, 
What Greeks are perisha__d! what a people lost! 
What tides of blood have drencha__d Scamandera__s shore! 
What crowds of heroes sunk to rise no more! 
Then hear me, chief! nor let the morrowa__s light 
Awake thy squadrons to new toils of fight: 
Some space at least permit the war to breathe, 
While we to flames our slaughtera__d friends bequeath, 
From the red field their scattera__d bodies bear, 
And nigh the fleet a funeral structure rear; 
So decent urns their snowy bones may keep, 
And pious children oa__er their ashes weep. 
Here, where on one promiscuous pile they blazed, 
High oa__er them all a general tomb be raised; 
Next, to secure our camp and naval powers, 
Raise an embattled wall, with lofty towers; 
From space to space be ample gates around, 
For passing chariots; and a trench profound. 
So Greece to combat shall in safety go, 
Nor fear the fierce incursions of the foe.a__ 
a__Twas thus the sage his wholesome counsel moved; 
The sceptred kings of Greece his words approved. 
Meanwhile, convened at Priama__s palace-gate, 
The Trojan peers in nightly council sate; 
A senate void of order, as of choice: 
Their hearts were fearful, and confused their voice. 
Antenor, rising, thus demands their ear: 
a_oeYe Trojans, Dardans, and auxiliars, hear! 
a__Tis heaven the counsel of my breast inspires, 
And I but move what every god requires: 
Let Spartaa__s treasures be this hour restored, 
And Argive Helen own her ancient lord. 
The ties of faith, the sworn alliance, broke, 
Our impious battles the just gods provoke. 
As this advice ye practise, or reject, 
So hope success, or dread the dire effect.a__ 
[pg 137] 
The senior spoke and sate. To whom replied 
The graceful husband of the Spartan bride: 
a_oeCold counsels, Trojan, may become thy years 
But sound ungrateful in a warriora__s ears: 
Old man, if void of fallacy or art, 
Thy words express the purpose of thy heart, 
Thou, in thy time, more sound advice hast given; 
But wisdom has its date, assigna__d by heaven. 
Then hear me, princes of the Trojan name! 
Their treasures Ia__ll restore, but not the dame; 
My treasures too, for peace, I will resign; 
But be this bright possession ever mine.a__ 
a__Twas then, the growing discord to compose, 
Slow from his seat the reverend Priam rose: 
His godlike aspect deep attention drew: 
He paused, and these pacific words ensue: 
a_oeYe Trojans, Dardans, and auxiliar bands! 
Now take refreshment as the hour demands; 
Guard well the walls, relieve the watch of night. 
Till the new sun restores the cheerful light. 
Then shall our herald, to the Atrides sent, 
Before their ships proclaim my sona__s intent. 
Next let a truce be aska__d, that Troy may burn 
Her slaughtera__d heroes, and their bones inurn; 
That done, once more the fate of war be tried, 
And whose the conquest, mighty Jove decide!a__ 
The monarch spoke: the warriors snatcha__d with haste 
(Each at his post in arms) a short repast. 
Soon as the rosy morn had waked the day, 
To the black ships Idaeus bent his way; 
There, to the sons of Mars, in council found, 
He raised his voice: the host stood listening round. 
a_oeYe sons of Atreus, and ye Greeks, give ear! 
The words of Troy, and Troya__s great monarch, hear. 
Pleased may ye hear (so heaven succeed my prayers) 
What Paris, author of the war, declares. 
The spoils and treasures he to Ilion bore 
(Oh had he perisha__d ere they toucha__d our shore!) 
He proffers injured Greece: with large increase 
Of added Trojan wealth to buy the peace. 
But to restore the beauteous bride again, 
This Greece demands, and Troy requests in vain. 
Next, O ye chiefs! we ask a truce to burn 
Our slaughtera__d heroes, and their bones inurn. 
That done, once more the fate of war be tried, 
And whose the conquest, mighty Jove decide!a__ 
The Greeks gave ear, but none the silence broke; 
At length Tydides rose, and rising spoke: 
a_oeOh, take not, friends! defrauded of your fame, 
Their proffera__d wealth, nor even the Spartan dame. 
[pg 138] 
Let conquest make them ours: fate shakes their wall, 
And Troy already totters to her fall.a__ 
The admiring chiefs, and all the Grecian name, 
With general shouts returna__d him loud acclaim. 
Then thus the king of kings rejects the peace: 
a_oeHerald! in him thou heara__st the voice of Greece 
For what remains; let funeral flames be fed 
With heroesa__ corps: I war not with the dead: 
Go search your slaughtered chiefs on yonder plain, 
And gratify the manes of the slain. 
Be witness, Jove, whose thunder rolls on high!a__ 
He said, and reara__d his sceptre to the sky. 
To sacred Troy, where all her princes lay 
To wait the event, the herald bent his way. 
He came, and standing in the midst, explaina__d 
The peace rejected, but the truce obtaina__d. 
Straight to their several cares the Trojans move, 
Some search the plains, some fell the sounding grove: 
Nor less the Greeks, descending on the shore, 
Hewa__d the green forests, and the bodies bore. 
And now from forth the chambers of the main, 
To shed his sacred light on earth again, 
Arose the golden chariot of the day, 
And tippa__d the mountains with a purple ray. 
In mingled throngs the Greek and Trojan train 
Through heaps of carnage searcha__d the mournful plain. 
Scarce could the friend his slaughtera__d friend explore, 
With dust dishonoura__d, and deformed with gore. 
The wounds they washa__d, their pious tears they shed, 
And, laid along their cars, deplored the dead. 
Sage Priam checka__d their grief: with silent haste 
The bodies decent on the piles were placed: 
With melting hearts the cold remains they burna__d, 
And, sadly slow, to sacred Troy returna__d. 
Nor less the Greeks their pious sorrows shed, 
And decent on the pile dispose the dead; 
The cold remains consume with equal care; 
And slowly, sadly, to their fleet repair. 
Now, ere the morn had streaka__d with reddening light 
The doubtful confines of the day and night, 
About the dying flames the Greeks appeara__d, 
And round the pile a general tomb they reara__d. 
Then, to secure the camp and naval powers, 
They raised embattled walls with lofty towers:186 
[pg 139] 
From space to space were ample gates around, 
For passing chariots, and a trench profound 
Of large extent; and deep in earth below, 
Strong piles infixa__d stood adverse to the foe. 
So toila__d the Greeks: meanwhile the gods above, 
In shining circle round their father Jove, 
Amazed beheld the wondrous works of man: 
Then he, whose trident shakes the earth, began: 
a_oeWhat mortals henceforth shall our power adore, 
Our fanes frequent, our oracles implore, 
If the proud Grecians thus successful boast 
Their rising bulwarks on the sea-beat coast? 
See the long walls extending to the main, 
No god consulted, and no victim slain! 
Their fame shall fill the worlda__s remotest ends, 
Wide as the morn her golden beam extends; 
While old Laomedona__s divine abodes, 
Those radiant structures raised by labouring gods, 
Shall, razed and lost, in long oblivion sleep.a__ 
Thus spoke the hoary monarch of the deep. 
The almighty Thunderer with a frown replies, 
That clouds the world, and blackens half the skies: 
a_oeStrong god of ocean! thou, whose rage can make 
The solid eartha__s eternal basis shake! 
What cause of fear from mortal works could move187 
The meanest subject of our realms above? 
Wherea__er the suna__s refulgent rays are cast, 
Thy power is honoura__d, and thy fame shall last. 
But yon proud work no future age shall view, 
No trace remain where once the glory grew. 
The sappa__d foundations by thy force shall fall, 
And, whelma__d beneath the waves, drop the huge wall: 
Vast drifts of sand shall change the former shore: 
The ruin vanisha__d, and the name no more.a__ 
Thus they in heaven: while, oa__er the Grecian train, 
The rolling sun descending to the main 
Beheld the finisha__d work. Their bulls they slew; 
Back from the tents the savoury vapour flew. 
And now the fleet, arrived from Lemnosa__ strands, 
With Bacchusa__ blessings cheered the generous bands. 
Of fragrant wines the rich Eunaeus sent 
A thousant measures to the royal tent. 
(Eunaeus, whom Hypsipyle of yore 
To Jason, shepherd of his people, bore,) 
[pg 140] 
The rest they purchased at their proper cost, 
And well the plenteous freight supplied the host: 
Each, in exchange, proportiona__d treasures gave;188 
Some, brass or iron; some, an ox, or slave. 
All night they feast, the Greek and Trojan powers: 
Those on the fields, and these within their towers. 
But Jove averse the signs of wrath displaya__d, 
And shot red lightnings through the gloomy shade: 
Humbled they stood; pale horror seized on all, 
While the deep thunder shook the aerial hall. 
Each poura__d to Jove before the bowl was crowna__d; 
And large libations drencha__d the thirsty ground: 
Then late, refresha__d with sleep from toils of fight, 
Enjoya__d the balmy blessings of the night. 
Illustration: GREEK AMPHORAa_"WINE VESSELS. 
GREEK AMPHORAa_"WINE VESSELS. 
[pg 141] 
BOOK VIII. 
ARGUMENT. 
THE SECOND BATTLE, AND THE DISTRESS OF THE GREEKS. 
Jupiter assembles a council of the deities, and threatens them with the 
pains of Tartarus if they assist either side: Minerva only obtains of 
him that she may direct the Greeks by her counsels.189 his balances the 
fates of both, and affrights the Greeks with his thunders and 
lightnings. Nestor alone continues in the field in great danger: Diomed 
relieves him; whose exploits, and those of Hector, are excellently 
described. Juno endeavours to animate Neptune to the assistance of the 
Greeks, but in vain. The acts of Teucer, who is at length wounded by 
Hector, and carried off. Juno and Minerva prepare to aid the Grecians, 
but are restrained by Iris, sent from Jupiter. The night puts an end to 
the battle. Hector continues in the field, (the Greeks being driven to 
their fortifications before the ships,) and gives orders to keep the 
watch all night in the camp, to prevent the enemy from re-embarking and 
escaping by flight. They kindle fires through all the fields, and pass 
the night under arms. 
The time of seven and twenty days is employed from the opening of the 
poem to the end of this book. The scene here (except of the celestial 
machines) lies in the field towards the seashore. 
Aurora now, fair daughter of the dawn, 
Sprinkled with rosy light the dewy lawn; 
When Jove convened the senate of the skies, 
Where high Olympusa__ cloudy tops arise, 
The sire of gods his awful silence broke; 
The heavens attentive trembled as he spoke: 
a_oeCelestial states! immortal gods! give ear, 
Hear our decree, and reverence what ye hear; 
The fixa__d decree which not all heaven can move; 
Thou, fate! fulfil it! and, ye powers, approve! 
[pg 142] 
What god but enters yon forbidden field, 
Who yields assistance, or but wills to yield, 
Back to the skies with shame he shall be driven, 
Gasha__d with dishonest wounds, the scorn of heaven; 
Or far, oh far, from steep Olympus thrown, 
Low in the dark Tartarean gulf shall groan, 
With burning chains fixa__d to the brazen floors, 
And locka__d by hella__s inexorable doors; 
As deep beneath the infernal centre hurla__d,190 
As from that centre to the ethereal world. 
Let him who tempts me, dread those dire abodes: 
And know, the Almighty is the god of gods. 
League all your forces, then, ye powers above, 
Join all, and try the omnipotence of Jove. 
Let down our golden everlasting chain191 
Whose strong embrace holds heaven, and earth, and main 
Strive all, of mortal and immortal birth, 
To drag, by this, the Thunderer down to earth 
Ye strive in vain! if I but stretch this hand, 
I heave the gods, the ocean, and the land; 
I fix the chain to great Olympusa__ height, 
And the vast world hangs trembling in my sight! 
For such I reign, unbounded and above; 
And such are men, and gods, compared to Jove.a__ 
The all-mighty spoke, nor durst the powers reply: 
A reverend horror silenced all the sky; 
Trembling they stood before their sovereigna__s look; 
At length his best-beloved, the power of wisdom, spoke: 
a_oeO first and greatest! God, by gods adored 
We own thy might, our father and our lord! 
But, ah! permit to pity human state: 
If not to help, at least lament their fate. 
From fields forbidden we submiss refrain, 
With arms unaiding mourn our Argives slain; 
Yet grant my counsels still their breasts may move, 
Or all must perish in the wrath of Jove.a__ 
[pg 143] 
The cloud-compelling god her suit approved, 
And smiled superior on his best beloved; 
Then calla__d his coursers, and his chariot took; 
The stedfast firmament beneath them shook: 
Rapt by the ethereal steeds the chariot rolla__d; 
Brass were their hoofs, their curling manes of gold: 
Of heavena__s undrossy gold the gods array, 
Refulgent, flasha__d intolerable day. 
High on the throne he shines: his coursers fly 
Between the extended earth and starry sky. 
But when to Idaa__s topmost height he came, 
(Fair nurse of fountains, and of savage game,) 
Where oa__er her pointed summits proudly raised, 
His fane breathed odours, and his altar blazed: 
There, from his radiant car, the sacred sire 
Of gods and men released the steeds of fire: 
Blue ambient mists the immortal steeds embraced; 
High on the cloudy point his seat he placed; 
Thence his broad eye the subject world surveys, 
The town, and tents, and navigable seas. 
Now had the Grecians snatcha__d a short repast, 
And buckled on their shining arms with haste. 
Troy roused as soon; for on this dreadful day 
The fate of fathers, wives, and infants lay. 
The gates unfolding pour forth all their train; 
Squadrons on squadrons cloud the dusky plain: 
Men, steeds, and chariots shake the trembling ground, 
The tumult thickens, and the skies resound; 
And now with shouts the shocking armies closed, 
To lances lances, shields to shields opposed, 
Host against host with shadowy legends drew, 
The sounding darts in iron tempests flew; 
Victors and vanquisha__d join promiscuous cries, 
Triumphant shouts and dying groans arise; 
With streaming blood the slippery fields are dyed, 
And slaughtera__d heroes swell the dreadful tide. 
Long as the morning beams, increasing bright, 
Oa__er heavena__s clear azure spread the sacred light, 
Commutual death the fate of war confounds, 
Each adverse battle gored with equal wounds. 
But when the sun the height of heaven ascends, 
The sire of gods his golden scales suspends,192 
[pg 144] 
With equal hand: in these explored the fate 
Of Greece and Troy, and poised the mighty weight: 
Pressa__d with its load, the Grecian balance lies 
Low sunk on earth, the Trojan strikes the skies. 
Then Jove from Idaa__s top his horrors spreads; 
The clouds burst dreadful oa__er the Grecian heads; 
Thick lightnings flash; the muttering thunder rolls; 
Their strength he withers, and unmans their souls. 
Before his wrath the trembling hosts retire; 
The gods in terrors, and the skies on fire. 
Nor great Idomeneus that sight could bear, 
Nor each stern Ajax, thunderbolts of war: 
Nor he, the king of war, the alarm sustaina__d 
Nestor alone, amidst the storm remaina__d. 
Unwilling he remaina__d, for Parisa__ dart 
Had pierced his courser in a mortal part; 
Fixa__d in the forehead, where the springing man 
Curla__d oa__er the brow, it stung him to the brain; 
Mad with his anguish, he begins to rear, 
Paw with his hoofs aloft, and lash the air. 
Scarce had his falchion cut the reins, and freed 
The encumbera__d chariot from the dying steed, 
When dreadful Hector, thundering through the war, 
Poura__d to the tumult on his whirling car. 
That day had stretcha__d beneath his matchless hand 
The hoary monarch of the Pylian band, 
But Diomed beheld; from forth the crowd 
He rusha__d, and on Ulysses calla__d aloud: 
a_oeWhither, oh whither does Ulysses run? 
Oh, flight unworthy great Laertesa__ son! 
Mixa__d with the vulgar shall thy fate be found, 
Pierced in the back, a vile, dishonest wound? 
Oh turn and save from Hectora__s direful rage 
The glory of the Greeks, the Pylian sage.a__ 
His fruitless words are lost unheard in air, 
Ulysses seeks the ships, and shelters there. 
But bold Tydides to the rescue goes, 
A single warrior midst a host of foes; 
Before the coursers with a sudden spring 
He leapa__d, and anxious thus bespoke the king: 
a_oeGreat perils, father! wait the unequal fight; 
These younger champions will oppress thy might. 
Thy veins no more with ancient vigour glow, 
Weak is thy servant, and thy coursers slow. 
Then haste, ascend my seat, and from the car 
Observe the steeds of Tros, renowna__d in war. 
[pg 145] 
Practised alike to turn, to stop, to chase, 
To dare the fight, or urge the rapid race: 
These late obeya__d A_neasa__ guiding rein; 
Leave thou thy chariot to our faithful train; 
With these against yon Trojans will we go, 
Nor shall great Hector want an equal foe; 
Fierce as he is, even he may learn to fear 
The thirsty fury of my flying spear.a__ 
Thus said the chief; and Nestor, skilla__d in war, 
Approves his counsel, and ascends the car: 
The steeds he left, their trusty servants hold; 
Eurymedon, and Sthenelus the bold: 
The reverend charioteer directs the course, 
And strains his aged arm to lash the horse. 
Hector they face; unknowing how to fear, 
Fierce he drove on; Tydides whirla__d his spear. 
The spear with erring haste mistook its way, 
But plunged in Eniopeusa__ bosom lay. 
His opening hand in death forsakes the rein; 
The steeds fly back: he falls, and spurns the plain. 
Great Hector sorrows for his servant killa__d, 
Yet unrevenged permits to press the field; 
Till, to supply his place and rule the car, 
Rose Archeptolemus, the fierce in war. 
And now had death and horror covera__d all;193 
Like timorous flocks the Trojans in their wall 
Inclosed had bled: but Jove with awful sound 
Rolla__d the big thunder oa__er the vast profound: 
Full in Tydidesa__ face the lightning flew; 
The ground before him flamed with sulphur blue; 
The quivering steeds fell prostrate at the sight; 
And Nestora__s trembling hand confessa__d his fright: 
He droppa__d the reins: and, shook with sacred dread, 
Thus, turning, warna__d the intrepid Diomed: 
a_oeO chief! too daring in thy frienda__s defence 
Retire advised, and urge the chariot hence. 
This day, averse, the sovereign of the skies 
Assists great Hector, and our palm denies. 
Some other sun may see the happier hour, 
When Greece shall conquer by his heavenly power. 
a__Tis not in man his fixa__d decree to move: 
The great will glory to submit to Jove.a__ 
a_oeO reverend prince! (Tydides thus replies) 
Thy years are awful, and thy words are wise. 
But ah, what grief! should haughty Hector boast 
I fled inglorious to the guarded coast. 
[pg 146] 
Before that dire disgrace shall blast my fame, 
Oa__erwhelm me, earth; and hide a warriora__s shame!a__ 
To whom Gerenian Nestor thus replied:194 
a_oeGods! can thy courage fear the Phrygiana__s pride? 
Hector may vaunt, but who shall heed the boast? 
Not those who felt thy arm, the Dardan host, 
Nor Troy, yet bleeding in her heroes lost; 
Not even a Phrygian dame, who dreads the sword 
That laid in dust her loved, lamented lord.a__ 
He said, and, hasty, oa__er the gasping throng 
Drives the swift steeds: the chariot smokes along; 
The shouts of Trojans thicken in the wind; 
The storm of hissing javelins pours behind. 
Then with a voice that shakes the solid skies, 
Pleased, Hector braves the warrior as he flies. 
a_oeGo, mighty hero! graced above the rest 
In seats of council and the sumptuous feast: 
Now hope no more those honours from thy train; 
Go less than woman, in the form of man! 
To scale our walls, to wrap our towers in flames, 
To lead in exile the fair Phrygian dames, 
Thy once proud hopes, presumptuous prince! are fled; 
This arm shall reach thy heart, and stretch thee dead.a__ 
Now fears dissuade him, and now hopes invite. 
To stop his coursers, and to stand the fight; 
Thrice turna__d the chief, and thrice imperial Jove 
On Idaa__s summits thundera__d from above. 
Great Hector heard; he saw the flashing light, 
(The sign of conquest,) and thus urged the fight: 
a_oeHear, every Trojan, Lycian, Dardan band, 
All famed in war, and dreadful hand to hand. 
Be mindful of the wreaths your arms have won, 
Your great forefathersa__ glories, and your own. 
Heard ye the voice of Jove? Success and fame 
Await on Troy, on Greece eternal shame. 
In vain they skulk behind their boasted wall, 
Weak bulwarks; destined by this arm to fall. 
High oa__er their slighted trench our steeds shall bound, 
And pass victorious oa__er the levella__d mound. 
Soon as before yon hollow ships we stand, 
Fight each with flames, and toss the blazing brand; 
Till, their proud navy wrapt in smoke and fires, 
All Greece, encompassa__d, in one blaze expires.a__ 
Furious he said; then bending oa__er the yoke, 
Encouraged his proud steeds, while thus he spoke: 
a_oeNow, Xanthus, A_thon, Lampus, urge the chase, 
And thou, Podargus! prove thy generous race; 
[pg 147] 
Be fleet, be fearless, this important day, 
And all your mastera__s well-spent care repay. 
For this, high-fed, in plenteous stalls ye stand, 
Served with pure wheat, and by a princessa__ hand; 
For this my spouse, of great Aetiona__s line, 
So oft has steepa__d the strengthening grain in wine. 
Now swift pursue, now thunder uncontrolla__d: 
Give me to seize rich Nestora__s shield of gold; 
From Tydeusa__ shoulders strip the costly load, 
Vulcanian arms, the labour of a god: 
These if we gain, then victory, ye powers! 
This night, this glorious night, the fleet is ours!a__ 
That heard, deep anguish stung Saturniaa__s soul; 
She shook her throne, that shook the starry pole: 
And thus to Neptune: a_oeThou, whose force can make 
The stedfast earth from her foundations shake, 
Seest thou the Greeks by fates unjust oppressa__d, 
Nor swells thy heart in that immortal breast? 
Yet A_gae, Helice, thy power obey,195 
And gifts unceasing on thine altars lay. 
Would all the deities of Greece combine, 
In vain the gloomy Thunderer might repine: 
Sole should he sit, with scarce a god to friend, 
And see his Trojans to the shades descend: 
Such be the scene from his Idaean bower; 
Ungrateful prospect to the sullen power!a__ 
Neptune with wrath rejects the rash design: 
a_oeWhat rage, what madness, furious queen! is thine? 
I war not with the highest. All above 
Submit and tremble at the hand of Jove.a__ 
Now godlike Hector, to whose matchless might 
Jove gave the glory of the destined fight, 
Squadrons on squadrons drives, and fills the fields 
With close-ranged chariots, and with thickena__d shields. 
Where the deep trench in length extended lay, 
Compacted troops stand wedged in firm array, 
A dreadful front! they shake the brands, and threat 
With long-destroying flames the hostile fleet. 
The king of men, by Junoa__s self inspired, 
Toila__d through the tents, and all his army fired. 
Swift as he moved, he lifted in his hand 
His purple robe, bright ensign of command. 
High on the midmost bark the king appeara__d: 
There, from Ulyssesa__ deck, his voice was heard: 
To Ajax and Achilles reacha__d the sound, 
Whose distant ships the guarded navy bound. 
a_oeO Argives! shame of human race! (he cried: 
The hollow vessels to his voice replied,) 
Where now are all your glorious boasts of yore, 
[pg 148] 
Your hasty triumphs on the Lemnian shore? 
Each fearless hero dares a hundred foes, 
While the feast lasts, and while the goblet flows; 
But who to meet one martial man is found, 
When the fight rages, and the flames surround? 
O mighty Jove! O sire of the distressa__d! 
Was ever king like me, like me oppressa__d? 
With power immense, with justice arma__d in vain; 
My glory ravisha__d, and my people slain! 
To thee my vows were breathed from every shore; 
What altar smoked not with our victimsa__ gore? 
With fat of bulls I fed the constant flame, 
And aska__d destruction to the Trojan name. 
Now, gracious god! far humbler our demand; 
Give these at least to a__scape from Hectora__s hand, 
And save the relics of the Grecian land!a__ 
Thus praya__d the king, and heavena__s great father heard 
His vows, in bitterness of soul preferra__d: 
The wrath appeased, by happy signs declares, 
And gives the people to their monarcha__s prayers. 
His eagle, sacred bird of heaven! he sent, 
A fawn his talons trussa__d, (divine portent!) 
High oa__er the wondering hosts he soara__d above, 
Who paid their vows to Panomphaean Jove; 
Then let the prey before his altar fall; 
The Greeks beheld, and transport seized on all: 
Encouraged by the sign, the troops revive, 
And fierce on Troy with doubled fury drive. 
Tydides first, of all the Grecian force, 
Oa__er the broad ditch impella__d his foaming horse, 
Pierced the deep ranks, their strongest battle tore, 
And dyed his javelin red with Trojan gore. 
Young Agelaus (Phradmon was his sire) 
With flying coursers shunna__d his dreadful ire; 
Struck through the back, the Phrygian fell oppressa__d; 
The dart drove on, and issued at his breast: 
Headlong he quits the car: his arms resound; 
His ponderous buckler thunders on the ground. 
Forth rush a tide of Greeks, the passage freed; 
The Atridae first, the Ajaces next succeed: 
Meriones, like Mars in arms renowna__d, 
And godlike Idomen, now passed the mound; 
Evaemona__s son next issues to the foe, 
And last young Teucer with his bended bow. 
Secure behind the Telamonian shield 
The skilful archer wide surveya__d the field, 
With every shaft some hostile victim slew, 
Then close beneath the sevenfold orb withdrew: 
The conscious infant so, when fear alarms, 
Retires for safety to the mothera__s arms. 
[pg 149] 
Thus Ajax guards his brother in the field, 
Moves as he moves, and turns the shining shield. 
Who first by Teucera__s mortal arrows bled? 
Orsilochus; then fell Ormenus dead: 
The godlike Lycophon next pressa__d the plain, 
With Chromius, Daetor, Ophelestes slain: 
Bold Hamopaon breathless sunk to ground; 
The bloody pile great Melanippus crowna__d. 
Heaps fell on heaps, sad trophies of his art, 
A Trojan ghost attending every dart. 
Great Agamemnon views with joyful eye 
The ranks grow thinner as his arrows fly: 
a_oeO youth forever dear! (the monarch cried) 
Thus, always thus, thy early worth be tried; 
Thy brave example shall retrieve our host, 
Thy countrya__s saviour, and thy fathera__s boast! 
Sprung from an aliena__s bed thy sire to grace, 
The vigorous offspring of a stolen embrace: 
Proud of his boy, he owna__d the generous flame, 
And the brave son repays his cares with fame. 
Now hear a monarcha__s vow: If heavena__s high powers 
Give me to raze Troya__s long-defended towers; 
Whatever treasures Greece for me design, 
The next rich honorary gift be thine: 
Some golden tripod, or distinguished car, 
With coursers dreadful in the ranks of war: 
Or some fair captive, whom thy eyes approve, 
Shall recompense the warriora__s toils with love.a__ 
To this the chief: a_oeWith praise the rest inspire, 
Nor urge a soul already filla__d with fire. 
What strength I have, be now in battle tried, 
Till every shaft in Phrygian blood be dyed. 
Since rallying from our wall we forced the foe, 
Still aima__d at Hector have I bent my bow: 
Eight forky arrows from this hand have fled, 
And eight bold heroes by their points lie dead: 
But sure some god denies me to destroy 
This fury of the field, this dog of Troy.a__ 
He said, and twanga__d the string. The weapon flies 
At Hectora__s breast, and sings along the skies: 
He missa__d the mark; but pierced Gorgythioa__s heart, 
And drencha__d in royal blood the thirsty dart. 
(Fair Castianira, nymph of form divine, 
This offspring added to king Priama__s line.) 
As full-blown poppies, overcharged with rain,196 
Decline the head, and drooping kiss the plain; 
[pg 150] 
So sinks the youth: his beauteous head, depressa__d 
Beneath his helmet, drops upon his breast. 
Another shaft the raging archer drew, 
That other shaft with erring fury flew, 
(From Hector, Phoebus turna__d the flying wound,) 
Yet fell not dry or guiltless to the ground: 
Thy breast, brave Archeptolemus! it tore, 
And dippa__d its feathers in no vulgar gore. 
Headlong he falls: his sudden fall alarms 
The steeds, that startle at his sounding arms. 
Hector with grief his charioteer beheld 
All pale and breathless on the sanguine field: 
Then bids Cebriones direct the rein, 
Quits his bright car, and issues on the plain. 
Dreadful he shouts: from earth a stone he took, 
And rusha__d on Teucer with the lifted rock. 
The youth already straina__d the forceful yew; 
The shaft already to his shoulder drew; 
The feather in his hand, just winga__d for flight, 
Toucha__d where the neck and hollow chest unite; 
There, where the juncture knits the channel bone, 
The furious chief discharged the craggy stone: 
The bow-string burst beneath the ponderous blow, 
And his numba__d hand dismissa__d his useless bow. 
He fell: but Ajax his broad shield displaya__d, 
And screena__d his brother with the mighty shade; 
Till great Alaster, and Mecistheus, bore 
The battera__d archer groaning to the shore. 
Troy yet found grace before the Olympian sire, 
He arma__d their hands, and filla__d their breasts with fire. 
The Greeks repulsed, retreat behind their wall, 
Or in the trench on heaps confusedly fall. 
First of the foe, great Hector marcha__d along, 
With terror clothed, and more than mortal strong. 
As the bold hound, that gives the lion chase, 
With beating bosom, and with eager pace, 
Hangs on his haunch, or fastens on his heels, 
Guards as he turns, and circles as he wheels; 
Thus oft the Grecians turna__d, but still they flew; 
Thus following, Hector still the hindmost slew. 
When flying they had passa__d the trench profound, 
And many a chief lay gasping on the ground; 
Before the ships a desperate stand they made, 
And fired the troops, and called the gods to aid. 
Fierce on his rattling chariot Hector came: 
His eyes like Gorgon shot a sanguine flame 
That withera__d all their host: like Mars he stood: 
Dire as the monster, dreadful as the god! 
Their strong distress the wife of Jove surveya__d; 
Then pensive thus, to wara__s triumphant maid: 
[pg 151] 
a_oeO daughter of that god, whose arm can wield 
The avenging bolt, and shake the sable shield! 
Now, in this moment of her last despair, 
Shall wretched Greece no more confess our care, 
Condemna__d to suffer the full force of fate, 
And drain the dregs of heavena__s relentless hate? 
Gods! shall one raging hand thus level all? 
What numbers fell! what numbers yet shall fall! 
What power divine shall Hectora__s wrath assuage? 
Still swells the slaughter, and still grows the rage!a__ 
So spake the imperial regent of the skies; 
To whom the goddess with the azure eyes: 
a_oeLong since had Hector staina__d these fields with gore, 
Stretcha__d by some Argive on his native shore: 
But he above, the sire of heaven, withstands, 
Mocks our attempts, and slights our just demands; 
The stubborn god, inflexible and hard, 
Forgets my service and deserved reward: 
Saved I, for this, his favourite son distressa__d, 
By stern Eurystheus with long labours pressa__d? 
He begga__d, with tears he begga__d, in deep dismay; 
I shot from heaven, and gave his arm the day. 
Oh had my wisdom known this dire event, 
When to grim Plutoa__s gloomy gates he went; 
The triple dog had never felt his chain, 
Nor Styx been crossa__d, nor hell explored in vain. 
Averse to me of all his heaven of gods, 
At Thetisa__ suit the partial Thunderer nods; 
To grace her gloomy, fierce, resenting son, 
My hopes are frustrate, and my Greeks undone. 
Some future day, perhaps, he may be moved 
To call his blue-eyed maid his best beloved. 
Haste, launch thy chariot, through yon ranks to ride; 
Myself will arm, and thunder at thy side. 
Then, goddess! say, shall Hector glory then? 
(That terror of the Greeks, that man of men) 
When Junoa__s self, and Pallas shall appear, 
All dreadful in the crimson walks of war! 
What mighty Trojan then, on yonder shore, 
Expiring, pale, and terrible no more, 
Shall feast the fowls, and glut the dogs with gore?a__ 
She ceased, and Juno reina__d the steeds with care: 
(Heavena__s awful empress, Saturna__s other heir:) 
Pallas, meanwhile, her various veil unbound, 
With flowers adorna__d, with art immortal crowna__d; 
The radiant robe her sacred fingers wove 
Floats in rich waves, and spreads the court of Jove. 
Her fathera__s arms her mighty limbs invest, 
His cuirass blazes on her ample breast. 
The vigorous power the trembling car ascends: 
[pg 152] 
Shook by her arm, the massy javelin bends: 
Huge, ponderous, strong! that when her fury burns 
Proud tyrants humbles, and whole hosts oa__erturns. 
Saturnia lends the lash; the coursers fly; 
Smooth glides the chariot through the liquid sky. 
Heavena__s gates spontaneous open to the powers, 
Heavena__s golden gates, kept by the winged Hours. 
Commissiona__d in alternate watch they stand, 
The suna__s bright portals and the skies command; 
Close, or unfold, the eternal gates of day 
Bar heaven with clouds, or roll those clouds away. 
The sounding hinges ring, the clouds divide. 
Prone down the steep of heaven their course they guide. 
But Jove, incensed, from Idaa__s top surveya__d, 
And thus enjoina__d the many-coloura__d maid. 
Illustration: JUNO AND MINERVA GOING TO ASSIST THE GREEKS. 
JUNO AND MINERVA GOING TO ASSIST THE GREEKS. 
a_oeThaumantia! mount the winds, and stop their car; 
Against the highest who shall wage the war? 
If furious yet they dare the vain debate, 
Thus have I spoke, and what I speak is fate: 
Their coursers crusha__d beneath the wheels shall lie, 
Their car in fragments, scattera__d oa__er the sky: 
My lightning these rebellious shall confound, 
And hurl them flaming, headlong, to the ground, 
Condemna__d for ten revolving years to weep 
The wounds impressa__d by burning thunder deep. 
So shall Minerva learn to fear our ire, 
Nor dare to combat hers and naturea__s sire. 
[pg 153] 
For Juno, headstrong and imperious still, 
She claims some title to transgress our will.a__ 
Swift as the wind, the various-coloura__d maid 
From Idaa__s top her golden wings displaya__d; 
To great Olympusa__ shining gate she flies, 
There meets the chariot rushing down the skies, 
Restrains their progress from the bright abodes, 
And speaks the mandate of the sire of gods. 
a_oeWhat frenzy goddesses! what rage can move 
Celestial minds to tempt the wrath of Jove? 
Desist, obedient to his high command: 
This is his word; and know his word shall stand: 
His lightning your rebellion shall confound, 
And hurl ye headlong, flaming, to the ground; 
Your horses crusha__d beneath the wheels shall lie, 
Your car in fragments scattera__d oa__er the sky; 
Yourselves condemna__d ten rolling years to weep 
The wounds impressa__d by burning thunder deep. 
So shall Minerva learn to fear his ire, 
Nor dare to combat hers and naturea__s sire. 
For Juno, headstrong and imperious still, 
She claims some title to transgress his will: 
But thee, what desperate insolence has driven 
To lift thy lance against the king of heaven?a__ 
Then, mounting on the pinions of the wind, 
She flew; and Juno thus her rage resigna__d: 
a_oeO daughter of that god, whose arm can wield 
The avenging bolt, and shake the dreadful shield 
No more let beings of superior birth 
Contend with Jove for this low race of earth; 
Triumphant now, now miserably slain, 
They breathe or perish as the fates ordain: 
But Jovea__s high counsels full effect shall find; 
And, ever constant, ever rule mankind.a__ 
She spoke, and backward turna__d her steeds of light, 
Adorna__d with manes of gold, and heavenly bright. 
The Hours unloosed them, panting as they stood, 
And heapa__d their mangers with ambrosial food. 
There tied, they rest in high celestial stalls; 
The chariot proppa__d against the crystal walls, 
The pensive goddesses, abasha__d, controlla__d, 
Mix with the gods, and fill their seats of gold. 
Illustration: THE HOURS TAKING THE HORSES FROM JUNO'S CAR. 
THE HOURS TAKING THE HORSES FROM JUNOa__S CAR. 
And now the Thunderer meditates his flight 
From Idaa__s summits to the Olympian height. 
Swifter than thought, the wheels instinctive fly, 
Flame through the vast of air, and reach the sky. 
a__Twas Neptunea__s charge his coursers to unbrace, 
And fix the car on its immortal base; 
There stood the chariot, beaming forth its rays, 
Till with a snowy veil he screena__d the blaze. 
[pg 154] 
He, whose all-conscious eyes the world behold, 
The eternal Thunderer sat, enthroned in gold. 
High heaven the footstool of his feet he makes, 
And wide beneath him all Olympus shakes. 
Trembling afar the offending powers appeara__d, 
Confused and silent, for his frown they feara__d. 
He saw their soul, and thus his word imparts: 
a_oePallas and Juno! say, why heave your hearts? 
Soon was your battle oa__er: proud Troy retired 
Before your face, and in your wrath expired. 
But know, whoea__er almighty power withstand! 
Unmatcha__d our force, unconquera__d is our hand: 
Who shall the sovereign of the skies control? 
Not all the gods that crown the starry pole. 
Your hearts shall tremble, if our arms we take, 
And each immortal nerve with horror shake. 
For thus I speak, and what I speak shall stand; 
What power soea__er provokes our lifted hand, 
On this our hill no more shall hold his place; 
Cut off, and exiled from the ethereal race.a__ 
Juno and Pallas grieving hear the doom, 
But feast their souls on Iliona__s woes to come. 
Though secret anger swella__d Minervaa__s breast, 
The prudent goddess yet her wrath repressa__d; 
But Juno, impotent of rage, replies: 
a_oeWhat hast thou said, O tyrant of the skies! 
Strength and omnipotence invest thy throne; 
a__Tis thine to punish; ours to grieve alone. 
For Greece we grieve, abandona__d by her fate 
To drink the dregs of thy unmeasured hate. 
[pg 155] 
From fields forbidden we submiss refrain, 
With arms unaiding see our Argives slain; 
Yet grant our counsels still their breasts may move, 
Lest all should perish in the rage of Jove.a__ 
The goddess thus; and thus the god replies, 
Who swells the clouds, and blackens all the skies: 
a_oeThe morning sun, awaked by loud alarms, 
Shall see the almighty Thunderer in arms. 
What heaps of Argives then shall load the plain, 
Those radiant eyes shall view, and view in vain. 
Nor shall great Hector cease the rage of fight, 
The navy flaming, and thy Greeks in flight, 
Even till the day when certain fates ordain 
That stern Achilles (his Patroclus slain) 
Shall rise in vengeance, and lay waste the plain. 
For such is fate, nor canst thou turn its course 
With all thy rage, with all thy rebel force. 
Fly, if thy wilt, to eartha__s remotest bound, 
Where on her utmost verge the seas resound; 
Where cursed Iapetus and Saturn dwell, 
Fast by the brink, within the streams of hell; 
No sun ea__er gilds the gloomy horrors there; 
No cheerful gales refresh the lazy air: 
There arm once more the bold Titanian band; 
And arm in vain; for what I will, shall stand.a__ 
Now deep in ocean sunk the lamp of light, 
And drew behind the cloudy veil of night: 
The conquering Trojans mourn his beams decaya__d; 
The Greeks rejoicing bless the friendly shade. 
The victors keep the field; and Hector calls 
A martial council near the navy walls; 
These to Scamandera__s bank apart he led, 
Where thinly scattera__d lay the heaps of dead. 
The assembled chiefs, descending on the ground, 
Attend his order, and their prince surround. 
A massy spear he bore of mighty strength, 
Of full ten cubits was the lancea__s length; 
The point was brass, refulgent to behold, 
Fixa__d to the wood with circling rings of gold: 
The noble Hector on his lance reclined, 
And, bending forward, thus reveala__d his mind: 
a_oeYe valiant Trojans, with attention hear! 
Ye Dardan bands, and generous aids, give ear! 
This day, we hoped, would wrap in conquering flame 
Greece with her ships, and crown our toils with fame. 
But darkness now, to save the cowards, falls, 
And guards them trembling in their wooden walls. 
Obey the night, and use her peaceful hours 
Our steeds to forage, and refresh our powers. 
Straight from the town be sheep and oxen sought, 
[pg 156] 
And strengthening bread and generous wine be brought 
Wide oa__er the field, high blazing to the sky, 
Let numerous fires the absent sun supply, 
The flaming piles with plenteous fuel raise, 
Till the bright morn her purple beam displays; 
Lest, in the silence and the shades of night, 
Greece on her sable ships attempt her flight. 
Not unmolested let the wretches gain 
Their lofty decks, or safely cleave the main; 
Some hostile wound let every dart bestow, 
Some lasting token of the Phrygian foe, 
Wounds, that long hence may ask their spousesa__ care. 
And warn their children from a Trojan war. 
Now through the circuit of our Ilion wall, 
Let sacred heralds sound the solemn call; 
To bid the sires with hoary honours crowna__d, 
And beardless youths, our battlements surround. 
Firm be the guard, while distant lie our powers, 
And let the matrons hang with lights the towers; 
Lest, under covert of the midnight shade, 
The insidious foe the naked town invade. 
Suffice, to-night, these orders to obey; 
A nobler charge shall rouse the dawning day. 
The gods, I trust, shall give to Hectora__s hand 
From these detested foes to free the land, 
Who plougha__d, with fates averse, the watery way: 
For Trojan vultures a predestined prey. 
Our common safety must be now the care; 
But soon as morning paints the fields of air, 
Sheathed in bright arms let every troop engage, 
And the fired fleet behold the battle rage. 
Then, then shall Hector and Tydides prove 
Whose fates are heaviest in the scales of Jove. 
To-morrowa__s light (O haste the glorious morn!) 
Shall see his bloody spoils in triumph borne, 
With this keen javelin shall his breast be gored, 
And prostrate heroes bleed around their lord. 
Certain as this, oh! might my days endure, 
From age inglorious, and black death secure; 
So might my life and glory know no bound, 
Like Pallas worshippa__d, like the sun renowna__d! 
As the next dawn, the last they shall enjoy, 
Shall crush the Greeks, and end the woes of Troy.a__ 
The leader spoke. From all his host around 
Shouts of applause along the shores resound. 
Each from the yoke the smoking steeds untied, 
And fixa__d their headstalls to his chariot-side. 
Fat sheep and oxen from the town are led, 
With generous wine, and all-sustaining bread, 
Full hecatombs lay burning on the shore: 
[pg 157] 
The winds to heaven the curling vapours bore. 
Ungrateful offering to the immortal powers!197 
Whose wrath hung heavy oa__er the Trojan towers: 
Nor Priam nor his sons obtaina__d their grace; 
Proud Troy they hated, and her guilty race. 
The troops exulting sat in order round, 
And beaming fires illumined all the ground. 
As when the moon, refulgent lamp of night,198 
Oa__er heavena__s pure azure spreads her sacred light, 
When not a breath disturbs the deep serene, 
And not a cloud oa__ercasts the solemn scene, 
Around her throne the vivid planets roll, 
And stars unnumbera__d gild the glowing pole, 
Oa__er the dark trees a yellower verdure shed, 
And tip with silver every mountaina__s head: 
Then shine the vales, the rocks in prospect rise, 
A flood of glory bursts from all the skies: 
The conscious swains, rejoicing in the sight, 
Eye the blue vault, and bless the useful light. 
So many flames before proud Ilion blaze, 
And lighten glimmering Xanthus with their rays. 
The long reflections of the distant fires 
Gleam on the walls, and tremble on the spires. 
A thousand piles the dusky horrors gild, 
And shoot a shady lustre oa__er the field. 
Full fifty guards each flaming pile attend, 
Whose umbera__d arms, by fits, thick flashes send, 
Loud neigh the coursers oa__er their heaps of corn, 
And ardent warriors wait the rising morn. 
[pg 158] 
Illustration: THE SHIELD OF ACHILLES. 
THE SHIELD OF ACHILLES. 
[pg 159] 
BOOK IX. 
ARGUMENT. 
THE EMBASSY TO ACHILLES. 
Agamemnon, after the last daya__s defeat, proposes to the Greeks to quit 
the siege, and return to their country. Diomed opposes this, and Nestor 
seconds him, praising his wisdom and resolution. He orders the guard to 
be strengthened, and a council summoned to deliberate what measures are 
to be followed in this emergency. Agamemnon pursues this advice, and 
Nestor further prevails upon him to send ambassadors to Achilles, in 
order to move him to a reconciliation. Ulysses and Ajax are made choice 
of, who are accompanied by old Phoenix. They make, each of them, very 
moving and pressing speeches, but are rejected with roughness by 
Achilles, who notwithstanding retains Phoenix in his tent. The 
ambassadors return unsuccessfully to the camp, and the troops betake 
themselves to sleep. 
This book, and the next following, take up the space of one night, 
which is the twenty-seventh from the beginning of the poem. The scene 
lies on the sea-shore, the station of the Grecian ships. 
Thus joyful Troy maintaina__d the watch of night; 
While fear, pale comrade of inglorious flight,199 
And heaven-bred horror, on the Grecian part, 
Sat on each face, and saddena__d every heart. 
As from its cloudy dungeon issuing forth, 
A double tempest of the west and north 
Swells oa__er the sea, from Thraciaa__s frozen shore, 
Heaps waves on waves, and bids the A_gean roar: 
This way and that the boiling deeps are tossa__d: 
Such various passions urged the troubled host, 
Great Agamemnon grieved above the rest; 
Superior sorrows swella__d his royal breast; 
Himself his orders to the heralds bears, 
To bid to council all the Grecian peers, 
But bid in whispers: these surround their chief, 
In solemn sadness and majestic grief. 
The king amidst the mournful circle rose: 
Down his wan cheek a briny torrent flows. 
[pg 160] 
So silent fountains, from a rocka__s tall head, 
In sable streams soft-trickling waters shed. 
With more than vulgar grief he stood oppressa__d; 
Words, mixa__d with sighs, thus bursting from his breast: 
a_oeYe sons of Greece! partake your leadera__s care; 
Fellows in arms and princes of the war! 
Of partial Jove too justly we complain, 
And heavenly oracles believed in vain. 
A safe return was promised to our toils, 
With conquest honoura__d and enricha__d with spoils: 
Now shameful flight alone can save the host; 
Our wealth, our people, and our glory lost. 
So Jove decrees, almighty lord of all! 
Jove, at whose nod whole empires rise or fall, 
Who shakes the feeble props of human trust, 
And towers and armies humbles to the dust. 
Haste then, for ever quit these fatal fields, 
Haste to the joys our native country yields; 
Spread all your canvas, all your oars employ, 
Nor hope the fall of heaven-defended Troy.a__ 
He said: deep silence held the Grecian band; 
Silent, unmova__d in dire dismay they stand; 
A pensive scene! till Tydeusa__ warlike son 
Rolla__d on the king his eyes, and thus begun: 
a_oeWhen kings advise us to renounce our fame, 
First let him speak who first has suffera__d shame. 
If I oppose thee, prince! thy wrath withhold, 
The laws of council bid my tongue be bold. 
Thou first, and thou alone, in fields of fight, 
Durst brand my courage, and defame my might: 
Nor from a friend the unkind reproach appeara__d, 
The Greeks stood witness, all our army heard. 
The gods, O chief! from whom our honours spring, 
The gods have made thee but by halves a king: 
They gave thee sceptres, and a wide command; 
They gave dominion oa__er the seas and land; 
The noblest power that might the world control 
They gave thee nota_"a brave and virtuous soul. 
Is this a generala__s voice, that would suggest 
Fears like his own to every Grecian breast? 
Confiding in our want of worth, he stands; 
And if we fly, a__tis what our king commands. 
Go thou, inglorious! from the embattled plain; 
Ships thou hast store, and nearest to the main; 
A noble care the Grecians shall employ, 
To combat, conquer, and extirpate Troy. 
Here Greece shall stay; or, if all Greece retire, 
Myself shall stay, till Troy or I expire; 
Myself, and Sthenelus, will fight for fame; 
God bade us fight, and a__twas with God we came.a__ 
[pg 161] 
He ceased; the Greeks loud acclamations raise, 
And voice to voice resounds Tydidesa__ praise. 
Wise Nestor then his reverend figure reara__d; 
He spoke: the host in still attention heard:200 
a_oeO truly great! in whom the gods have joina__d 
Such strength of body with such force of mind: 
In conduct, as in courage, you excel, 
Still first to act what you advise so well. 
These wholesome counsels which thy wisdom moves, 
Applauding Greece with common voice approves. 
Kings thou canst blame; a bold but prudent youth: 
And blame even kings with praise, because with truth. 
And yet those years that since thy birth have run 
Would hardly style thee Nestora__s youngest son. 
Then let me add what yet remains behind, 
A thought unfinisha__d in that generous mind; 
Age bids me speak! nor shall the advice I bring 
Distaste the people, or offend the king: 
a_oeCursed is the man, and void of law and right, 
Unworthy property, unworthy light, 
Unfit for public rule, or private care, 
That wretch, that monster, who delights in war; 
Whose lust is murder, and whose horrid joy, 
To tear his country, and his kind destroy! 
This night, refresh and fortify thy train; 
Between the trench and wall let guards remain: 
Be that the duty of the young and bold; 
But thou, O king, to council call the old; 
Great is thy sway, and weighty are thy cares; 
Thy high commands must spirit all our wars. 
With Thracian wines recruit thy honoura__d guests, 
For happy counsels flow from sober feasts. 
Wise, weighty counsels aid a state distressa__d, 
And such a monarch as can choose the best. 
See what a blaze from hostile tents aspires, 
How near our fleet approach the Trojan fires! 
Who can, unmoved, behold the dreadful light? 
What eye beholds them, and can close to-night? 
This dreadful interval determines all; 
To-morrow, Troy must flame, or Greece must fall.a__ 
Thus spoke the hoary sage: the rest obey; 
Swift through the gates the guards direct their way. 
His son was first to pass the lofty mound, 
The generous Thrasymed, in arms renowna__d: 
Next him, Ascalaphus, Ialmen, stood, 
The double offspring of the warrior-god: 
[pg 162] 
Deipyrus, Aphareus, Merion join, 
And Lycomed of Creona__s noble line. 
Seven were the leaders of the nightly bands, 
And each bold chief a hundred spears commands. 
The fires they light, to short repasts they fall, 
Some line the trench, and others man the wall. 
The king of men, on public counsels bent, 
Convened the princes in his ample tent, 
Each seized a portion of the kingly feast, 
But staya__d his hand when thirst and hunger ceased. 
Then Nestor spoke, for wisdom long approved, 
And slowly rising, thus the council moved. 
a_oeMonarch of nations! whose superior sway 
Assembled states, and lords of earth obey, 
The laws and sceptres to thy hand are given, 
And millions own the care of thee and Heaven. 
O king! the counsels of my age attend; 
With thee my cares begin, with thee must end. 
Thee, prince! it fits alike to speak and hear, 
Pronounce with judgment, with regard give ear, 
To see no wholesome motion be withstood, 
And ratify the best for public good. 
Nor, though a meaner give advice, repine, 
But follow it, and make the wisdom thine. 
Hear then a thought, not now conceived in haste, 
At once my present judgment and my past. 
When from Pelidesa__ tent you forced the maid, 
I first opposed, and faithful, durst dissuade; 
But bold of soul, when headlong fury fired, 
You wronged the man, by men and gods admired: 
Now seek some means his fatal wrath to end, 
With prayers to move him, or with gifts to bend.a__ 
To whom the king. a_oeWith justice hast thou shown 
A princea__s faults, and I with reason own. 
That happy man, whom Jove still honours most, 
Is more than armies, and himself a host. 
Blessa__d in his love, this wondrous hero stands; 
Heaven fights his war, and humbles all our bands. 
Fain would my heart, which erra__d through frantic rage, 
The wrathful chief and angry gods assuage. 
If gifts immense his mighty soul can bow,201 
Hear, all ye Greeks, and witness what I vow. 
[pg 163] 
Ten weighty talents of the purest gold, 
And twice ten vases of refulgent mould: 
Seven sacred tripods, whose unsullied frame 
Yet knows no office, nor has felt the flame; 
Twelve steeds unmatcha__d in fleetness and in force, 
And still victorious in the dusty course; 
(Rich were the man whose ample stores exceed 
The prizes purchased by their winged speed;) 
Seven lovely captives of the Lesbian line, 
Skilla__d in each art, unmatcha__d in form divine, 
The same I chose for more than vulgar charms, 
When Lesbos sank beneath the heroa__s arms: 
All these, to buy his friendship, shall be paid, 
And joina__d with these the long-contested maid; 
With all her charms, Briseis I resign, 
And solemn swear those charms were never mine; 
Untoucha__d she staya__d, uninjured she removes, 
Pure from my arms, and guiltless of my loves,202 
These instant shall be his; and if the powers 
Give to our arms proud Iliona__s hostile towers, 
Then shall he store (when Greece the spoil divides) 
With gold and brass his loaded navya__s sides: 
Besides, full twenty nymphs of Trojan race 
With copious love shall crown his warm embrace, 
Such as himself will choose; who yield to none, 
Or yield to Helena__s heavenly charms alone. 
Yet hear me further: when our wars are oa__er, 
If safe we land on Argosa__ fruitful shore, 
There shall he live my son, our honours share, 
And with Orestesa__ self divide my care. 
Yet morea_"three daughters in my court are bred, 
And each well worthy of a royal bed; 
Laodice and Iphigenia fair,203 
And bright Chrysothemis with golden hair; 
Her let him choose whom most his eyes approve, 
I ask no presents, no reward for love: 
Myself will give the dower; so vast a store 
As never father gave a child before. 
Seven ample cities shall confess his sway, 
Him Enope, and Pherae him obey, 
Cardamyle with ample turrets crowna__d, 
And sacred Pedasus for vines renowna__d; 
A_pea fair, the pastures Hira yields, 
And rich Antheia with her flowery fields:204 
[pg 164] 
The whole extent to Pylosa__ sandy plain, 
Along the verdant margin of the main 
There heifers graze, and labouring oxen toil; 
Bold are the men, and generous is the soil; 
There shall he reign, with power and justice crowna__d, 
And rule the tributary realms around. 
All this I give, his vengeance to control, 
And sure all this may move his mighty soul. 
Pluto, the grisly god, who never spares, 
Who feels no mercy, and who hears no prayers, 
Lives dark and dreadful in deep hella__s abodes, 
And mortals hate him, as the worst of gods 
Great though he be, it fits him to obey, 
Since more than his my years, and more my sway.a__ 
Illustration: PLUTO. 
PLUTO. 
The monarch thus. The reverend Nestor then: 
a_oeGreat Agamemnon! glorious king of men! 
Such are thy offers as a prince may take, 
And such as fits a generous king to make. 
Let chosen delegates this hour be sent 
(Myself will name them) to Pelidesa__ tent. 
Let Phoenix lead, revered for hoary age, 
Great Ajax next, and Ithacus the sage. 
Yet more to sanctify the word you send, 
Let Hodius and Eurybates attend. 
[pg 165] 
Now pray to Jove to grant what Greece demands; 
Pray in deep silence,205 and with purest hands.a__206 
Illustration: THE EMBASSY TO ACHILLES. 
THE EMBASSY TO ACHILLES. 
He said; and all approved. The heralds bring 
The cleansing water from the living spring. 
The youth with wine the sacred goblets crowna__d, 
And large libations drencha__d the sands around. 
The rite performa__d, the chiefs their thirst allay, 
Then from the royal tent they take their way; 
Wise Nestor turns on each his careful eye, 
Forbids to offend, instructs them to apply; 
Much he advised them all, Ulysses most, 
To deprecate the chief, and save the host. 
Through the still night they march, and hear the roar 
Of murmuring billows on the sounding shore. 
To Neptune, ruler of the seas profound, 
Whose liquid arms the mighty globe surround, 
They pour forth vows, their embassy to bless, 
And calm the rage of stern A_acides. 
And now, arrived, where on the sandy bay 
The Myrmidonian tents and vessels lay; 
Amused at ease, the godlike man they found, 
Pleased with the solemn harpa__s harmonious sound. 
(The well wrought harp from conquered Thebae came; 
Of polisha__d silver was its costly frame.) 
[pg 166] 
With this he soothes his angry soul, and sings 
The immortal deeds of heroes and of kings. 
Patroclus only of the royal train, 
Placed in his tent, attends the lofty strain: 
Full opposite he sat, and listena__d long, 
In silence waiting till he ceased the song. 
Unseen the Grecian embassy proceeds 
To his high tent; the great Ulysses leads. 
Achilles starting, as the chiefs he spied, 
Leapa__d from his seat, and laid the harp aside. 
With like surprise arose Menoetiusa__ son: 
Pelides graspa__d their hands, and thus begun: 
a_oePrinces, all hail! whatever brought you here. 
Or strong necessity, or urgent fear; 
Welcome, though Greeks! for not as foes ye came; 
To me more dear than all that bear the name.a__ 
With that, the chiefs beneath his roof he led, 
And placed in seats with purple carpets spread. 
Then thusa_"a_oePatroclus, crown a larger bowl, 
Mix purer wine, and open every soul. 
Of all the warriors yonder host can send, 
Thy friend most honours these, and these thy friend.a__ 
He said: Patroclus oa__er the blazing fire 
Heaps in a brazen vase three chines entire: 
The brazen vase Automedon sustains, 
Which flesh of porker, sheep, and goat contains. 
Achilles at the genial feast presides, 
The parts transfixes, and with skill divides. 
Meanwhile Patroclus sweats, the fire to raise; 
The tent is brightena__d with the rising blaze: 
Then, when the languid flames at length subside, 
He strows a bed of glowing embers wide, 
Above the coals the smoking fragments turns 
And sprinkles sacred salt from lifted urns; 
With bread the glittering canisters they load, 
Which round the board Menoetiusa__ son bestowa__d; 
Himself, opposed to Ulysses full in sight, 
Each portion parts, and orders every rite. 
The first fat offering to the immortals due, 
Amidst the greedy flames Patroclus threw; 
Then each, indulging in the social feast, 
His thirst and hunger soberly repressa__d. 
That done, to Phoenix Ajax gave the sign: 
Not unperceived; Ulysses crowna__d with wine 
The foaming bowl, and instant thus began, 
His speech addressing to the godlike man. 
a_oeHealth to Achilles! happy are thy guests! 
Not those more honoura__d whom Atrides feasts: 
Though generous plenty crown thy loaded boards, 
That, Agamemnona__s regal tent affords; 
[pg 167] 
But greater cares sit heavy on our souls, 
Nor eased by banquets or by flowing bowls. 
What scenes of slaughter in yon fields appear! 
The dead we mourn, and for the living fear; 
Greece on the brink of fate all doubtful stands, 
And owns no help but from thy saving hands: 
Troy and her aids for ready vengeance call; 
Their threatening tents already shade our wall: 
Hear how with shouts their conquest they proclaim, 
And point at every ship their vengeful flame! 
For them the father of the gods declares, 
Theirs are his omens, and his thunder theirs. 
See, full of Jove, avenging Hector rise! 
See! heaven and earth the raging chief defies; 
What fury in his breast, what lightning in his eyes! 
He waits but for the morn, to sink in flame 
The ships, the Greeks, and all the Grecian name. 
Heavens! how my countrya__s woes distract my mind, 
Lest Fate accomplish all his rage designa__d! 
And must we, gods! our heads inglorious lay 
In Trojan dust, and this the fatal day? 
Return, Achilles: oh return, though late, 
To save thy Greeks, and stop the course of Fate; 
If in that heart or grief or courage lies, 
Rise to redeem; ah, yet to conquer, rise! 
The day may come, when, all our warriors slain, 
That heart shall melt, that courage rise in vain: 
Regard in time, O prince divinely brave! 
Those wholesome counsels which thy father gave. 
When Peleus in his aged arms embraced 
His parting son, these accents were his last: 
a_oea__My child! with strength, with glory, and success, 
Thy arms may Juno and Minerva bless! 
Trust that to Heaven: but thou, thy cares engage 
To calm thy passions, and subdue thy rage: 
From gentler manners let thy glory grow, 
And shun contention, the sure source of woe; 
That young and old may in thy praise combine, 
The virtues of humanity be thinea_"a__ 
This now-despised advice thy father gave; 
Ah! check thy anger; and be truly brave. 
If thou wilt yield to great Atridesa__ prayers, 
Gifts worthy thee his royal hand prepares; 
If nota_"but hear me, while I number oa__er 
The proffera__d presents, an exhaustless store. 
Ten weighty talents of the purest gold, 
And twice ten vases of refulgent mould; 
Seven sacred tripods, whose unsullied frame 
Yet knows no office, nor has felt the flame; 
Twelve steeds unmatched in fleetness and in force, 
[pg 168] 
And still victorious in the dusty course; 
(Rich were the man, whose ample stores exceed 
The prizes purchased by their winged speed;) 
Seven lovely captives of the Lesbian line, 
Skilla__d in each art, unmatcha__d in form divine, 
The same he chose for more than vulgar charms, 
When Lesbos sank beneath thy conquering arms. 
All these, to buy thy friendship shall be paid, 
And, joina__d with these, the long-contested maid; 
With all her charms, Briseis hea__ll resign, 
And solemn swear those charms were only thine; 
Untoucha__d she staya__d, uninjured she removes, 
Pure from his arms, and guiltless of his loves. 
These instant shall be thine; and if the powers 
Give to our arms proud Iliona__s hostile towers, 
Then shalt thou store (when Greece the spoil divides) 
With gold and brass thy loaded navya__s sides. 
Besides, full twenty nymphs of Trojan race 
With copious love shall crown thy warm embrace; 
Such as thyself shall chose; who yield to none, 
Or yield to Helena__s heavenly charms alone. 
Yet hear me further: when our wars are oa__er, 
If safe we land on Argosa__ fruitful shore, 
There shalt thou live his son, his honour share, 
And with Orestesa__ self divide his care. 
Yet morea_"three daughters in his court are bred, 
And each well worthy of a royal bed: 
Laodice and Iphigenia fair, 
And bright Chrysothemis with golden hair: 
Her shalt thou wed whom most thy eyes approve; 
He asks no presents, no reward for love: 
Himself will give the dower; so vast a store 
As never father gave a child before. 
Seven ample cities shall confess thy sway, 
The Enope and Pherae thee obey, 
Cardamyle with ample turrets crowna__d, 
And sacred Pedasus, for vines renowna__d: 
A_pea fair, the pastures Hira yields, 
And rich Antheia with her flowery fields; 
The whole extent to Pylosa__ sandy plain, 
Along the verdant margin of the main. 
There heifers graze, and labouring oxen toil; 
Bold are the men, and generous is the soil. 
There shalt thou reign, with power and justice crowna__d, 
And rule the tributary realms around. 
Such are the proffers which this day we bring, 
Such the repentance of a suppliant king. 
But if all this, relentless, thou disdain, 
If honour and if interest plead in vain, 
Yet some redress to suppliant Greece afford, 
[pg 169] 
And be, amongst her guardian gods, adored. 
If no regard thy suffering country claim, 
Hear thy own glory, and the voice of fame: 
For now that chief, whose unresisted ire 
Made nations tremble, and whole hosts retire, 
Proud Hector, now, the unequal fight demands, 
And only triumphs to deserve thy hands.a__ 
Then thus the goddess-born: a_oeUlysses, hear 
A faithful speech, that knows nor art nor fear; 
What in my secret soul is understood, 
My tongue shall utter, and my deeds make good. 
Let Greece then know, my purpose I retain: 
Nor with new treaties vex my peace in vain. 
Who dares think one thing, and another tell, 
My heart detests him as the gates of hell. 
a_oeThen thus in short my fixa__d resolves attend, 
Which nor Atrides nor his Greeks can bend; 
Long toils, long perils in their cause I bore, 
But now the unfruitful glories charm no more. 
Fight or not fight, a like reward we claim, 
The wretch and hero find their prize the same. 
Alike regretted in the dust he lies, 
Who yields ignobly, or who bravely dies. 
Of all my dangers, all my glorious pains, 
A life of labours, lo! what fruit remains? 
As the bold bird her helpless young attends, 
From danger guards them, and from want defends; 
In search of prey she wings the spacious air, 
And with the untasted food supplies her care: 
For thankless Greece such hardships have I braved, 
Her wives, her infants, by my labours saved; 
Long sleepless nights in heavy arms I stood, 
And sweat laborious days in dust and blood. 
I sacka__d twelve ample cities on the main,207 
And twelve lay smoking on the Trojan plain: 
Then at Atridesa__ haughty feet were laid 
The wealth I gathered, and the spoils I made. 
Your mighty monarch these in peace possessa__d; 
Some few my soldiers had, himself the rest. 
Some present, too, to every prince was paid; 
And every prince enjoys the gift he made: 
I only must refund, of all his train; 
See what pre-eminence our merits gain! 
My spoil alone his greedy soul delights: 
My spouse alone must bless his lustful nights: 
The woman, let him (as he may) enjoy; 
[pg 170] 
But whata__s the quarrel, then, of Greece to Troy? 
What to these shores the assembled nations draws, 
What calls for vengeance but a womana__s cause? 
Are fair endowments and a beauteous face 
Beloved by none but those of Atreusa__ race? 
The wife whom choice and passion doth approve, 
Sure every wise and worthy man will love. 
Nor did my fair one less distinction claim; 
Slave as she was, my soul adored the dame. 
Wronga__d in my love, all proffers I disdain; 
Deceived for once, I trust not kings again. 
Ye have my answera_"what remains to do, 
Your king, Ulysses, may consult with you. 
What needs he the defence this arm can make? 
Has he not walls no human force can shake? 
Has he not fenced his guarded navy round 
With piles, with ramparts, and a trench profound? 
And will not these (the wonders he has done) 
Repel the rage of Priama__s single son? 
There was a time (a__twas when for Greece I fought) 
When Hectora__s prowess no such wonders wrought; 
He kept the verge of Troy, nor dared to wait 
Achillesa__ fury at the Scaean gate; 
He tried it once, and scarce was saved by fate. 
But now those ancient enmities are oa__er; 
To-morrow we the favouring gods implore; 
Then shall you see our parting vessels crowna__d, 
And hear with oars the Hellespont resound. 
The third day hence shall Pthia greet our sails,208 
If mighty Neptune send propitious gales; 
Pthia to her Achilles shall restore 
[pg 171] 
The wealth he left for this detested shore: 
Thither the spoils of this long war shall pass, 
The ruddy gold, the steel, and shining brass: 
My beauteous captives thither Ia__ll convey, 
And all that rests of my unravisha__d prey. 
One only valued gift your tyrant gave, 
And that resumeda_"the fair Lyrnessian slave. 
Then tell him: loud, that all the Greeks may hear, 
And learn to scorn the wretch they basely fear; 
(For arma__d in impudence, mankind he braves, 
And meditates new cheats on all his slaves; 
Though shameless as he is, to face these eyes 
Is what he dares not: if he dares he dies;) 
Tell him, all terms, all commerce I decline, 
Nor share his council, nor his battle join; 
For once deceiva__d, was his; but twice were mine, 
Noa_"let the stupid prince, whom Jove deprives 
Of sense and justice, run where frenzy drives; 
His gifts are hateful: kings of such a kind 
Stand but as slaves before a noble mind, 
Not though he proffera__d all himself possessa__d, 
And all his rapine could from others wrest: 
Not all the golden tides of wealth that crown 
The many-peopled Orchomenian town;209 
Not all proud Thebesa__ unrivalla__d walls contain, 
The worlda__s great empress on the Egyptian plain 
(That spreads her conquests oa__er a thousand states, 
And pours her heroes through a hundred gates, 
Two hundred horsemen and two hundred cars 
From each wide portal issuing to the wars);210 
Though bribes were heapa__d on bribes, in number more 
Than dust in fields, or sands along the shore; 
Should all these offers for my friendship call, 
a__Tis he that offers, and I scorn them all. 
Atridesa__ daughter never shall be led 
(An ill-matcha__d consort) to Achillesa__ bed; 
Like golden Venus though she charma__d the heart, 
And vied with Pallas in the works of art; 
Some greater Greek let those high nuptials grace, 
I hate alliance with a tyranta__s race. 
If heaven restore me to my realms with life, 
[pg 172] 
The reverend Peleus shall elect my wife; 
Thessalian nymphs there are of form divine, 
And kings that sue to mix their blood with mine. 
Blessa__d in kind love, my years shall glide away, 
Content with just hereditary sway; 
There, deaf for ever to the martial strife, 
Enjoy the dear prerogative of life. 
Life is not to be bought with heaps of gold. 
Not all Apolloa__s Pythian treasures hold, 
Or Troy once held, in peace and pride of sway, 
Can bribe the poor possession of a day! 
Lost herds and treasures we by arms regain, 
And steeds unrivalla__d on the dusty plain: 
But from our lips the vital spirit fled, 
Returns no more to wake the silent dead. 
My fates long since by Thetis were disclosed, 
And each alternate, life or fame, proposed; 
Here, if I stay, before the Trojan town, 
Short is my date, but deathless my renown: 
If I return, I quit immortal praise 
For years on years, and long-extended days. 
Convinced, though late, I find my fond mistake, 
And warn the Greeks the wiser choice to make; 
To quit these shores, their native seats enjoy, 
Nor hope the fall of heaven-defended Troy. 
Jovea__s arm displaya__d asserts her from the skies! 
Her hearts are strengthena__d, and her glories rise. 
Go then to Greece, report our fixa__d design; 
Bid all your counsels, all your armies join, 
Let all your forces, all your arts conspire, 
To save the ships, the troops, the chiefs, from fire. 
One stratagem has faila__d, and others will: 
Ye find, Achilles is unconquera__d still. 
Go thena_"digest my message as ye maya_" 
But here this night let reverend Phoenix stay: 
His tedious toils and hoary hairs demand 
A peaceful death in Pthiaa__s friendly land. 
But whether he remain or sail with me, 
His age be sacred, and his will be free.a__ 
Illustration: GREEK GALLEY. 
GREEK GALLEY. 
The son of Peleus ceased: the chiefs around 
In silence wrapt, in consternation drowna__d, 
Attend the stern reply. Then Phoenix rose; 
(Down his white beard a stream of sorrow flows;) 
And while the fate of suffering Greece he mourna__d, 
With accent weak these tender words returna__d. 
Illustration: PROSERPINE. 
PROSERPINE. 
a_oeDivine Achilles! wilt thou then retire, 
And leave our hosts in blood, our fleets on fire? 
If wrath so dreadful fill thy ruthless mind, 
How shall thy friend, thy Phoenix, stay behind? 
The royal Peleus, when from Pthiaa__s coast 
[pg 173] 
He sent thee early to the Achaian host; 
Thy youth as then in sage debates unskilla__d, 
And new to perils of the direful field: 
He bade me teach thee all the ways of war, 
To shine in councils, and in camps to dare. 
Never, ah, never let me leave thy side! 
No time shall part us, and no fate divide, 
Not though the god, that breathed my life, restore 
The bloom I boasted, and the port I bore, 
When Greece of old beheld my youthful flames 
(Delightful Greece, the land of lovely dames), 
My father faithless to my mothera__s arms, 
Old as he was, adored a strangera__s charms. 
I tried what youth could do (at her desire) 
To win the damsel, and prevent my sire. 
My sire with curses loads my hated head, 
And cries, a__Ye furies! barren be his bed.a__ 
Infernal Jove, the vengeful fiends below, 
And ruthless Proserpine, confirma__d his vow. 
Despair and grief distract my labouring mind! 
Gods! what a crime my impious heart designa__d! 
I thought (but some kind god that thought suppressa__d) 
To plunge the poniard in my fathera__s breast; 
Then meditate my flight: my friends in vain 
With prayers entreat me, and with force detain. 
On fat of rams, black bulls, and brawny swine, 
They daily feast, with draughts of fragrant wine; 
Strong guards they placed, and watcha__d nine nights entire; 
The roofs and porches flamed with constant fire. 
The tenth, I forced the gates, unseen of all: 
And, favoura__d by the night, oa__erleapa__d the wall, 
My travels thence through spacious Greece extend; 
In Phthiaa__s court at last my labours end. 
Your sire received me, as his son caressa__d, 
With gifts enricha__d, and with possessions blessa__d. 
The strong Dolopians thenceforth owna__d my reign, 
And all the coast that runs along the main. 
By love to thee his bounties I repaid, 
And early wisdom to thy soul conveya__d: 
[pg 174] 
Great as thou art, my lessons made thee brave: 
A child I took thee, but a hero gave. 
Thy infant breast a like affection showa__d; 
Still in my arms (an ever-pleasing load) 
Or at my knee, by Phoenix wouldst thou stand; 
No food was grateful but from Phoenixa__ hand.211 
I pass my watchings oa__er thy helpless years, 
The tender labours, the compliant cares, 
The gods (I thought) reversed their hard decree, 
And Phoenix felt a fathera__s joys in thee: 
Thy growing virtues justified my cares, 
And promised comfort to my silver hairs. 
Now be thy rage, thy fatal rage, resigna__d; 
A cruel heart ill suits a manly mind: 
The gods (the only great, and only wise) 
Are moved by offerings, vows, and sacrifice; 
Offending man their high compassion wins, 
And daily prayers atone for daily sins. 
Prayers are Jovea__s daughters, of celestial race, 
Lame are their feet, and wrinkled is their face; 
With humble mien, and with dejected eyes, 
Constant they follow, where injustice flies. 
Injustice swift, erect, and unconfined, 
Sweeps the wide earth, and tramples oa__er mankind, 
While Prayers, to heal her wrongs, move slow behind. 
Who hears these daughters of almighty Jove, 
For him they mediate to the throne above 
When man rejects the humble suit they make, 
The sire revenges for the daughtersa__ sake; 
From Jove commissiona__d, fierce injustice then 
Descends to punish unrelenting men. 
O let not headlong passion bear the sway 
These reconciling goddesses obey 
Due honours to the seed of Jove belong, 
Due honours calm the fierce, and bend the strong. 
[pg 175] 
Were these not paid thee by the terms we bring, 
Were rage still harboura__d in the haughty king; 
Nor Greece nor all her fortunes should engage 
Thy friend to plead against so just a rage. 
But since what honour asks the general sends, 
And sends by those whom most thy heart commends; 
The best and noblest of the Grecian train; 
Permit not these to sue, and sue in vain! 
Let me (my son) an ancient fact unfold, 
A great example drawn from times of old; 
Hear what our fathers were, and what their praise, 
Who conquera__d their revenge in former days. 
a_oeWhere Calydon on rocky mountains stands212 
Once fought the A_tolian and Curetian bands; 
To guard it those; to conquer, these advance; 
And mutual deaths were dealt with mutual chance. 
The silver Cynthia bade contention rise, 
In vengeance of neglected sacrifice; 
On OEneus fields she sent a monstrous boar, 
That levella__d harvests, and whole forests tore: 
This beast (when many a chief his tusks had slain) 
Great Meleager stretcha__d along the plain, 
Then, for his spoils, a new debate arose, 
The neighbour nations thence commencing foes. 
Strong as they were, the bold Curetes faila__d, 
While Meleagera__s thundering arm prevaila__d: 
Till rage at length inflamed his lofty breast 
(For rage invades the wisest and the best). 
a_oeCursed by Althaea, to his wrath he yields, 
And in his wifea__s embrace forgets the fields. 
(She from Marpessa sprung, divinely fair, 
And matchless Idas, more than man in war: 
The god of day adored the mothera__s charms; 
Against the god the father bent his arms: 
The afflicted pair, their sorrows to proclaim, 
From Cleopatra changed their daughtera__s name, 
And calla__d Alcyone; a name to show 
The fathera__s grief, the mourning mothera__s woe.) 
To her the chief retired from stern debate, 
But found no peace from fierce Althaeaa__s hate: 
Althaeaa__s hate the unhappy warrior drew, 
Whose luckless hand his royal uncle slew; 
She beat the ground, and calla__d the powers beneath 
On her own son to wreak her brothera__s death; 
Hell heard her curses from the realms profound, 
And the red fiends that walk the nightly round. 
In vain A_tolia her deliverer waits, 
[pg 176] 
War shakes her walls, and thunders at her gates. 
She sent ambassadors, a chosen band, 
Priests of the gods, and elders of the land; 
Besought the chief to save the sinking state: 
Their prayers were urgent, and their proffers great: 
(Full fifty acres of the richest ground, 
Half pasture green, and half with vineyards crowna__d:) 
His suppliant father, aged OEneus, came; 
His sisters followa__d; even the vengeful dame, 
Althaea, sues; his friends before him fall: 
He stands relentless, and rejects them all. 
Meanwhile the victora__s shouts ascend the skies; 
The walls are scaled; the rolling flames arise; 
At length his wife (a form divine) appears, 
With piercing cries, and supplicating tears; 
She paints the horrors of a conquera__d town, 
The heroes slain, the palaces oa__erthrown, 
The matrons ravisha__d, the whole race enslaved: 
The warrior heard, he vanquisha__d, and he saved. 
The A_tolians, long disdaina__d, now took their turn, 
And left the chief their broken faith to mourn. 
Learn hence, betimes to curb pernicious ire, 
Nor stay till yonder fleets ascend in fire; 
Accept the presents; draw thy conquering sword; 
And be amongst our guardian gods adored.a__ 
Thus he: the stern Achilles thus replied: 
a_oeMy second father, and my reverend guide: 
Thy friend, believe me, no such gifts demands, 
And asks no honours from a mortala__s hands; 
Jove honours me, and favours my designs; 
His pleasure guides me, and his will confines; 
And here I stay (if such his high behest) 
While lifea__s warm spirit beats within my breast. 
Yet hear one word, and lodge it in thy heart: 
No more molest me on Atridesa__ part: 
Is it for him these tears are taught to flow, 
For him these sorrows? for my mortal foe? 
A generous friendship no cold medium knows, 
Burns with one love, with one resentment glows; 
One should our interests and our passions be; 
My friend must hate the man that injures me. 
Do this, my Phoenix, a__tis a generous part; 
And share my realms, my honours, and my heart. 
Let these return: our voyage, or our stay, 
Rest undetermined till the dawning day.a__ 
He ceased; then ordera__d for the sagea__s bed 
A warmer couch with numerous carpets spread. 
With that, stern Ajax his long silence broke, 
And thus, impatient, to Ulysses spoke: 
a_oeHence let us goa_"why waste we time in vain? 
[pg 177] 
See what effect our low submissions gain! 
Liked or not liked, his words we must relate, 
The Greeks expect them, and our heroes wait. 
Proud as he is, that iron heart retains 
Its stubborn purpose, and his friends disdains. 
Stern and unpitying! if a brother bleed, 
On just atonement, we remit the deed; 
A sire the slaughter of his son forgives; 
The price of blood discharged, the murderer lives: 
The haughtiest hearts at length their rage resign, 
And gifts can conquer every soul but thine.213 
The gods that unrelenting breast have steela__d, 
And cursed thee with a mind that cannot yield. 
One woman-slave was ravisha__d from thy arms: 
Lo, seven are offera__d, and of equal charms. 
Then hear, Achilles! be of better mind; 
Revere thy roof, and to thy guests be kind; 
And know the men of all the Grecian host, 
Who honour worth, and prize thy valour most.a__ 
a_oeO soul of battles, and thy peoplea__s guide! 
(To Ajax thus the first of Greeks replied) 
Well hast thou spoke; but at the tyranta__s name 
My rage rekindles, and my soula__s on flame: 
a__Tis just resentment, and becomes the brave: 
Disgraced, dishonoura__d, like the vilest slave! 
Return, then, heroes! and our answer bear, 
The glorious combat is no more my care; 
Not till, amidst yon sinking navy slain, 
The blood of Greeks shall dye the sable main; 
Not till the flames, by Hectora__s fury thrown, 
Consume your vessels, and approach my own; 
Just there, the impetuous homicide shall stand, 
There cease his battle, and there feel our hand.a__ 
This said, each prince a double goblet crowna__d, 
And cast a large libation on the ground; 
Then to their vessels, through the gloomy shades, 
The chiefs return; divine Ulysses leads. 
Meantime Achillesa__ slaves prepared a bed, 
With fleeces, carpets, and soft linen spread: 
There, till the sacred morn restored the day, 
In slumber sweet the reverend Phoenix lay. 
But in his inner tent, an ampler space, 
Achilles slept; and in his warm embrace 
Fair Diomede of the Lesbian race. 
Last, for Patroclus was the couch prepared, 
Whose nightly joys the beauteous Iphis shared; 
[pg 178] 
Achilles to his friend consigna__d her charms 
When Scyros fell before his conquering arms. 
And now the elected chiefs whom Greece had sent, 
Passa__d through the hosts, and reacha__d the royal tent. 
Then rising all, with goblets in their hands, 
The peers and leaders of the Achaian bands 
Haila__d their return: Atrides first begun: 
a_oeSay what success? divine Laertesa__ son! 
Achillesa__ high resolves declare to all: 
a_oeReturns the chief, or must our navy fall?a__ 
a_oeGreat king of nations! (Ithacus replied) 
Fixa__d is his wrath, unconquera__d is his pride; 
He slights thy friendship, thy proposals scorns, 
And, thus implored, with fiercer fury burns. 
To save our army, and our fleets to free, 
Is not his care; but left to Greece and thee. 
Your eyes shall view, when morning paints the sky, 
Beneath his oars the whitening billows fly; 
Us too he bids our oars and sails employ, 
Nor hope the fall of heaven-protected Troy; 
For Jove oa__ershades her with his arm divine, 
Inspires her war, and bids her glory shine. 
Such was his word: what further he declared, 
These sacred heralds and great Ajax heard. 
But Phoenix in his tent the chief retains, 
Safe to transport him to his native plains 
When morning dawns; if other he decree, 
His age is sacred, and his choice is free.a__ 
Ulysses ceased: the great Achaian host, 
With sorrow seized, in consternation lost, 
Attend the stern reply. Tydides broke 
The general silence, and undaunted spoke. 
a_oeWhy should we gifts to proud Achilles send, 
Or strive with prayers his haughty soul to bend? 
His countrya__s woes he glories to deride, 
And prayers will burst that swelling heart with pride. 
Be the fierce impulse of his rage obeya__d, 
Our battles let him or desert or aid; 
Then let him arm when Jove or he think fit: 
That, to his madness, or to Heaven commit: 
What for ourselves we can, is always ours; 
This night, let due repast refresh our powers; 
(For strength consists in spirits and in blood, 
And those are owed to generous wine and food;) 
But when the rosy messenger of day 
Strikes the blue mountains with her golden ray, 
Ranged at the ships, let all our squadrons shine 
In flaming arms, a long-extended line: 
In the dread front let great Atrides stand, 
The first in danger, as in high command.a__ 
[pg 179] 
Shouts of acclaim the listening heroes raise, 
Then each to Heaven the due libations pays; 
Till sleep, descending oa__er the tents, bestows 
The grateful blessings of desired repose.a__214 
Illustration: ACHILLES. 
ACHILLES. 
[pg 180] 
BOOK X. 
ARGUMENT. 
THE NIGHT-ADVENTURE OF DIOMED AND ULYSSES. 
Upon the refusal of Achilles to return to the army, the distress of 
Agamemnon is described in the most lively manner. He takes no rest that 
night, but passes through the camp, awaking the leaders, and contriving 
all possible methods for the public safety. Menelaus, Nestor, Ulysses, 
and Diomed are employed in raising the rest of the captains. They call 
a council of war, and determine to send scouts into the enemiesa__ camp, 
to learn their posture, and discover their intentions. Diomed 
undertakes this hazardous enterprise, and makes choice of Ulysses for 
his companion. In their passage they surprise Dolon, whom Hector had 
sent on a like design to the camp of the Grecians. From him they are 
informed of the situation of the Trojan and auxiliary forces, and 
particularly of Rhesus, and the Thracians who were lately arrived. They 
pass on with success; kill Rhesus, with several of his officers, and 
seize the famous horses of that prince, with which they return in 
triumph to the camp. 
The same night continues; the scene lies in the two camps. 
All night the chiefs before their vessels lay, 
And lost in sleep the labours of the day: 
All but the king: with various thoughts oppressa__d,215 
His countrya__s cares lay rolling in his breast. 
As when by lightnings Jovea__s ethereal power 
Foretels the rattling hail, or weighty shower, 
Or sends soft snows to whiten all the shore, 
Or bids the brazen throat of war to roar; 
By fits one flash succeeds as one expires, 
And heaven flames thick with momentary fires: 
So bursting frequent from Atridesa__ breast, 
Sighs following sighs his inward fears confessa__d. 
Now oa__er the fields, dejected, he surveys 
From thousand Trojan fires the mounting blaze; 
Hears in the passing wind their music blow, 
And marks distinct the voices of the foe. 
[pg 181] 
Now looking backwards to the fleet and coast, 
Anxious he sorrows for the endangered host. 
He rends his hair, in sacrifice to Jove, 
And sues to him that ever lives above: 
Inly he groans; while glory and despair 
Divide his heart, and wage a double war. 
A thousand cares his labouring breast revolves; 
To seek sage Nestor now the chief resolves, 
With him, in wholesome counsels, to debate 
What yet remains to save the afflicted state. 
He rose, and first he cast his mantle round, 
Next on his feet the shining sandals bound; 
A liona__s yellow spoils his back conceala__d; 
His warlike hand a pointed javelin held. 
Meanwhile his brother, pressa__d with equal woes, 
Alike denied the gifts of soft repose, 
Laments for Greece, that in his cause before 
So much had suffera__d and must suffer more. 
A leoparda__s spotted hide his shoulders spread: 
A brazen helmet glittera__d on his head: 
Thus (with a javelin in his hand) he went 
To wake Atrides in the royal tent. 
Already waked, Atrides he descried, 
His armour buckling at his vessela__s side. 
Joyful they met; the Spartan thus begun: 
a_oeWhy puts my brother his bright armour on? 
Sends he some spy, amidst these silent hours, 
To try yon camp, and watch the Trojan powers? 
But say, what hero shall sustain that task? 
Such bold exploits uncommon courage ask; 
Guideless, alone, through nighta__s dark shade to go, 
And midst a hostile camp explore the foe.a__ 
To whom the king: a_oeIn such distress we stand, 
No vulgar counsel our affairs demand; 
Greece to preserve, is now no easy part, 
But asks high wisdom, deep design, and art. 
For Jove, averse, our humble prayer denies, 
And bows his head to Hectora__s sacrifice. 
What eye has witnessa__d, or what ear believed, 
In one great day, by one great arm achieved, 
Such wondrous deeds as Hectora__s hand has done, 
And we beheld, the last revolving sun 
What honours the beloved of Jove adorn! 
Sprung from no god, and of no goddess born; 
Yet such his acts, as Greeks unborn shall tell, 
And curse the battle where their fathers fell. 
a_oeNow speed thy hasty course along the fleet, 
There call great Ajax, and the prince of Crete; 
Ourself to hoary Nestor will repair; 
To keep the guards on duty be his care, 
[pg 182] 
(For Nestora__s influence best that quarter guides, 
Whose son with Merion, oa__er the watch presides.a__) 
To whom the Spartan: a_oeThese thy orders borne, 
Say, shall I stay, or with despatch return?a__ 
a_oeThere shall thou stay, (the king of men replied,) 
Else may we miss to meet, without a guide, 
The paths so many, and the camp so wide. 
Still, with your voice the slothful soldiers raise, 
Urge by their fathersa__ fame their future praise. 
Forget we now our state and lofty birth; 
Not titles here, but works, must prove our worth. 
To labour is the lot of man below; 
And when Jove gave us life, he gave us woe.a__ 
This said, each parted to his several cares: 
The king to Nestora__s sable ship repairs; 
The sage protector of the Greeks he found 
Stretcha__d in his bed with all his arms around 
The various-coloura__d scarf, the shield he rears, 
The shining helmet, and the pointed spears; 
The dreadful weapons of the warriora__s rage, 
That, old in arms, disdaina__d the peace of age. 
Then, leaning on his hand his watchful head, 
The hoary monarch raised his eyes and said: 
a_oeWhat art thou, speak, that on designs unknown, 
While others sleep, thus range the camp alone; 
Seeka__st thou some friend or nightly sentinel? 
Stand off, approach not, but thy purpose tell.a__ 
a_oeO son of Neleus, (thus the king rejoina__d,) 
Pride of the Greeks, and glory of thy kind! 
Lo, here the wretched Agamemnon stands, 
The unhappy general of the Grecian bands, 
Whom Jove decrees with daily cares to bend, 
And woes, that only with his life shall end! 
Scarce can my knees these trembling limbs sustain, 
And scarce my heart support its load of pain. 
No taste of sleep these heavy eyes have known, 
Confused, and sad, I wander thus alone, 
With fears distracted, with no fixa__d design; 
And all my peoplea__s miseries are mine. 
If aught of use thy waking thoughts suggest, 
(Since cares, like mine, deprive thy soul of rest,) 
Impart thy counsel, and assist thy friend; 
Now let us jointly to the trench descend, 
At every gate the fainting guard excite, 
Tired with the toils of day and watch of night; 
Else may the sudden foe our works invade, 
So near, and favoura__d by the gloomy shade.a__ 
To him thus Nestor: a_oeTrust the powers above, 
Nor think proud Hectora__s hopes confirma__d by Jove: 
How ill agree the views of vain mankind, 
[pg 183] 
And the wise counsels of the eternal mind! 
Audacious Hector, if the gods ordain 
That great Achilles rise and rage again, 
What toils attend thee, and what woes remain! 
Lo, faithful Nestor thy command obeys; 
The care is next our other chiefs to raise: 
Ulysses, Diomed, we chiefly need; 
Meges for strength, Oileus famed for speed. 
Some other be despatcha__d of nimbler feet, 
To those tall ships, remotest of the fleet, 
Where lie great Ajax and the king of Crete.216 
To rouse the Spartan I myself decree; 
Dear as he is to us, and dear to thee, 
Yet must I tax his sloth, that claims no share 
With his great brother in his martial care: 
Him it behoved to every chief to sue, 
Preventing every part performa__d by you; 
For strong necessity our toils demands, 
Claims all our hearts, and urges all our hands.a__ 
To whom the king: a_oeWith reverence we allow 
Thy just rebukes, yet learn to spare them now: 
My generous brother is of gentle kind, 
He seems remiss, but bears a valiant mind; 
Through too much deference to our sovereign sway, 
Content to follow when we lead the way: 
But now, our ills industrious to prevent, 
Long ere the rest he rose, and sought my tent. 
The chiefs you named, already at his call, 
Prepare to meet us near the navy-wall; 
Assembling there, between the trench and gates, 
Near the night-guards, our chosen council waits.a__ 
a_oeThen none (said Nestor) shall his rule withstand, 
For great examples justify command.a__ 
With that, the venerable warrior rose; 
The shining greaves his manly legs enclose; 
His purple mantle golden buckles joina__d, 
Warm with the softest wool, and doubly lined. 
Then rushing from his tent, he snatcha__d in haste 
His steely lance, that lightena__d as he passa__d. 
The camp he traversed through the sleeping crowd, 
Stoppa__d at Ulyssesa__ tent, and calla__d aloud. 
Ulysses, sudden as the voice was sent, 
Awakes, starts up, and issues from his tent. 
a_oeWhat new distress, what sudden cause of fright, 
Thus leads you wandering in the silent night?a__ 
a_oeO prudent chief! (the Pylian sage replied) 
Wise as thou art, be now thy wisdom tried: 
Whatever means of safety can be sought, 
Whatever counsels can inspire our thought, 
[pg 184] 
Whatever methods, or to fly or fight; 
All, all depend on this important night!a__ 
He heard, returna__d, and took his painted shield; 
Then joina__d the chiefs, and followa__d through the field. 
Without his tent, bold Diomed they found, 
All sheathed in arms, his brave companions round: 
Each sunk in sleep, extended on the field, 
His head reclining on his bossy shield. 
A wood of spears stood by, that, fixa__d upright, 
Shot from their flashing points a quivering light. 
A bulla__s black hide composed the heroa__s bed; 
A splendid carpet rolla__d beneath his head. 
Then, with his foot, old Nestor gently shakes 
The slumbering chief, and in these words awakes: 
a_oeRise, son of Tydeus! to the brave and strong 
Rest seems inglorious, and the night too long. 
But sleepa__st thou now, when from yon hill the foe 
Hangs oa__er the fleet, and shades our walls below?a__ 
At this, soft slumber from his eyelids fled; 
The warrior saw the hoary chief, and said: 
a_oeWondrous old man! whose soul no respite knows, 
Though years and honours bid thee seek repose, 
Let younger Greeks our sleeping warriors wake; 
Ill fits thy age these toils to undertake.a__ 
a_oeMy friend, (he answered,) generous is thy care; 
These toils, my subjects and my sons might bear; 
Their loyal thoughts and pious love conspire 
To ease a sovereign and relieve a sire: 
But now the last despair surrounds our host; 
No hour must pass, no moment must be lost; 
Each single Greek, in this conclusive strife, 
Stands on the sharpest edge of death or life: 
Yet, if my years thy kind regard engage, 
Employ thy youth as I employ my age; 
Succeed to these my cares, and rouse the rest; 
He serves me most, who serves his country best.a__ 
This said, the hero oa__er his shoulders flung 
A liona__s spoils, that to his ankles hung; 
Then seized his ponderous lance, and strode along. 
Meges the bold, with Ajax famed for speed, 
The warrior roused, and to the entrenchments lead. 
And now the chiefs approach the nightly guard; 
A wakeful squadron, each in arms prepared: 
The unwearied watch their listening leaders keep, 
And, couching close, repel invading sleep. 
So faithful dogs their fleecy charge maintain, 
With toil protected from the prowling train; 
When the gaunt lioness, with hunger bold, 
Springs from the mountains toward the guarded fold: 
Through breaking woods her rustling course they hear; 
[pg 185] 
Loud, and more loud, the clamours strike their ear 
Of hounds and men: they start, they gaze around, 
Watch every side, and turn to every sound. 
Thus watcha__d the Grecians, cautious of surprise, 
Each voice, each motion, drew their ears and eyes: 
Each step of passing feet increased the affright; 
And hostile Troy was ever full in sight. 
Nestor with joy the wakeful band surveya__d, 
And thus accosted through the gloomy shade. 
a_oea__Tis well, my sons! your nightly cares employ; 
Else must our host become the scorn of Troy. 
Watch thus, and Greece shall live.a__ The hero said; 
Then oa__er the trench the following chieftains led. 
His son, and godlike Merion, marcha__d behind 
(For these the princes to their council joina__d). 
The trenches passa__d, the assembled kings around 
In silent state the consistory crowna__d. 
A place there was, yet undefiled with gore, 
The spot where Hector stoppa__d his rage before; 
When night descending, from his vengeful hand 
Reprieved the relics of the Grecian band: 
(The plain beside with mangled corps was spread, 
And all his progress marka__d by heaps of dead:) 
There sat the mournful kings: when Neleusa__ son, 
The council opening, in these words begun: 
a_oeIs there (said he) a chief so greatly brave, 
His life to hazard, and his country save? 
Lives there a man, who singly dares to go 
To yonder camp, or seize some straggling foe? 
Or favoura__d by the night approach so near, 
Their speech, their counsels, and designs to hear? 
If to besiege our navies they prepare, 
Or Troy once more must be the seat of war? 
This could he learn, and to our peers recite, 
And pass unharma__d the dangers of the night; 
What fame were his through all succeeding days, 
While Phoebus shines, or men have tongues to praise! 
What gifts his grateful country would bestow! 
What must not Greece to her deliverer owe? 
A sable ewe each leader should provide, 
With each a sable lambkin by her side; 
At every rite his share should be increased, 
And his the foremost honours of the feast.a__ 
Fear held them mute: alone, untaught to fear, 
Tydides spokea_"a_oeThe man you seek is here. 
Through yon black camps to bend my dangerous way, 
Some god within commands, and I obey. 
But let some other chosen warrior join, 
To raise my hopes, and second my design. 
By mutual confidence and mutual aid, 
[pg 186] 
Great deeds are done, and great discoveries made; 
The wise new prudence from the wise acquire, 
And one brave hero fans anothera__s fire.a__ 
Contending leaders at the word arose; 
Each generous breast with emulation glows; 
So brave a task each Ajax strove to share, 
Bold Merion strove, and Nestora__s valiant heir; 
The Spartan wisha__d the second place to gain, 
And great Ulysses wisha__d, nor wisha__d in vain. 
Then thus the king of men the contest ends: 
a_oeThou first of warriors, and thou best of friends, 
Undaunted Diomed! what chief to join 
In this great enterprise, is only thine. 
Just be thy choice, without affection made; 
To birth, or office, no respect be paid; 
Let worth determine here.a__ The monarch spake, 
And inly trembled for his brothera__s sake. 
a_oeThen thus (the godlike Diomed rejoina__d) 
My choice declares the impulse of my mind. 
How can I doubt, while great Ulysses stands 
To lend his counsels and assist our hands? 
A chief, whose safety is Minervaa__s care; 
So famed, so dreadful, in the works of war: 
Blessa__d in his conduct, I no aid require; 
Wisdom like his might pass through flames of fire.a__ 
a_oeIt fits thee not, before these chiefs of fame, 
(Replied the sage,) to praise me, or to blame: 
Praise from a friend, or censure from a foe, 
Are lost on hearers that our merits know. 
But let us hastea_"Night rolls the hours away, 
The reddening orient shows the coming day, 
The stars shine fainter on the ethereal plains, 
And of nighta__s empire but a third remains.a__ 
Thus having spoke, with generous ardour pressa__d, 
In arms terrific their huge limbs they dressa__d. 
A two-edged falchion Thrasymed the brave, 
And ample buckler, to Tydides gave: 
Then in a leathern helm he cased his head, 
Short of its crest, and with no plume oa__erspread: 
(Such as by youths unused to arms are worn:) 
No spoils enrich it, and no studs adorn. 
Next him Ulysses took a shining sword, 
A bow and quiver, with bright arrows stored: 
A well-proved casque, with leather braces bound, 
(Thy gift, Meriones,) his temples crowna__d; 
Soft wool within; without, in order spread,217 
A boara__s white teeth grinna__d horrid oa__er his head. 
This from Amyntor, rich Ormenusa__ son, 
[pg 187] 
Autolycus by fraudful rapine won, 
And gave Amphidamas; from him the prize 
Molus received, the pledge of social ties; 
The helmet next by Merion was possessa__d, 
And now Ulyssesa__ thoughtful temples pressa__d. 
Thus sheathed in arms, the council they forsake, 
And dark through paths oblique their progress take. 
Just then, in sign she favoura__d their intent, 
A long-winga__d heron great Minerva sent: 
This, though surrounding shades obscured their view. 
By the shrill clang and whistling wings they knew. 
As from the right she soara__d, Ulysses praya__d, 
Haila__d the glad omen, and addressa__d the maid: 
a_oeO daughter of that god whose arm can wield 
The avenging bolt, and shake the dreadful shield! 
O thou! for ever present in my way, 
Who all my motions, all my toils survey! 
Safe may we pass beneath the gloomy shade, 
Safe by thy succour to our ships conveya__d, 
And let some deed this signal night adorn, 
To claim the tears of Trojans yet unborn.a__ 
Then godlike Diomed preferra__d his prayer: 
a_oeDaughter of Jove, unconquera__d Pallas! hear. 
Great queen of arms, whose favour Tydeus won, 
As thou defenda__st the sire, defend the son. 
When on A_sopusa__ banks the banded powers 
Of Greece he left, and sought the Theban towers, 
Peace was his charge; received with peaceful show, 
He went a legate, but returna__d a foe: 
Then helpa__d by thee, and covera__d by thy shield, 
He fought with numbers, and made numbers yield. 
So now be present, O celestial maid! 
So still continue to the race thine aid! 
A youthful steer shall fall beneath the stroke, 
Untamed, unconscious of the galling yoke, 
With ample forehead, and with spreading horns, 
Whose taper tops refulgent gold adorns.a__ 
The heroes praya__d, and Pallas from the skies 
Accords their vow, succeeds their enterprise. 
Now, like two lions panting for the prey, 
With dreadful thoughts they trace the dreary way, 
Through the black horrors of the ensanguined plain, 
Through dust, through blood, oa__er arms, and hills of slain. 
Nor less bold Hector, and the sons of Troy, 
On high designs the wakeful hours employ; 
The assembled peers their lofty chief enclosed; 
Who thus the counsels of his breast proposed: 
a_oeWhat glorious man, for high attempts prepared, 
Dares greatly venture for a rich reward? 
Of yonder fleet a bold discovery make, 
[pg 188] 
What watch they keep, and what resolves they take? 
If now subdued they meditate their flight, 
And, spent with toil, neglect the watch of night? 
His be the chariot that shall please him most, 
Of all the plunder of the vanquisha__d host; 
His the fair steeds that all the rest excel, 
And his the glory to have served so well.a__ 
A youth there was among the tribes of Troy, 
Dolon his name, Eumedesa__ only boy, 
(Five girls beside the reverend herald told.) 
Rich was the son in brass, and rich in gold; 
Not blessa__d by nature with the charms of face, 
But swift of foot, and matchless in the race. 
a_oeHector! (he said) my courage bids me meet 
This high achievement, and explore the fleet: 
But first exalt thy sceptre to the skies, 
And swear to grant me the demanded prize; 
The immortal coursers, and the glittering car, 
That bear Pelides through the ranks of war. 
Encouraged thus, no idle scout I go, 
Fulfil thy wish, their whole intention know, 
Even to the royal tent pursue my way, 
And all their counsels, all their aims betray.a__ 
The chief then heaved the golden sceptre high, 
Attesting thus the monarch of the sky: 
a_oeBe witness thou! immortal lord of all! 
Whose thunder shakes the dark aerial hall: 
By none but Dolon shall this prize be borne, 
And him alone the immortal steeds adorn.a__ 
Thus Hector swore: the gods were calla__d in vain, 
But the rash youth prepares to scour the plain: 
Across his back the bended bow he flung, 
A wolfa__s grey hide around his shoulders hung, 
A ferreta__s downy fur his helmet lined, 
And in his hand a pointed javelin shined. 
Then (never to return) he sought the shore, 
And trod the path his feet must tread no more. 
Scarce had he passa__d the steeds and Trojan throng, 
(Still bending forward as he coursed along,) 
When, on the hollow way, the approaching tread 
Ulysses marka__d, and thus to Diomed; 
a_oeO friend! I hear some step of hostile feet, 
Moving this way, or hastening to the fleet; 
Some spy, perhaps, to lurk beside the main; 
Or nightly pillager that strips the slain. 
Yet let him pass, and win a little space; 
Then rush behind him, and prevent his pace. 
But if too swift of foot he flies before, 
Confine his course along the fleet and shore, 
[pg 189] 
Betwixt the camp and him our spears employ, 
And intercept his hoped return to Troy.a__ 
With that they steppa__d aside, and stoopa__d their head, 
(As Dolon passa__d,) behind a heap of dead: 
Along the path the spy unwary flew; 
Soft, at just distance, both the chiefs pursue. 
So distant they, and such the space between, 
As when two teams of mules divide the green, 
(To whom the hind like shares of land allows,) 
When now new furrows part the approaching ploughs. 
Now Dolon, listening, heard them as they passa__d; 
Hector (he thought) had sent, and checka__d his haste, 
Till scarce at distance of a javelina__s throw, 
No voice succeeding, he perceived the foe. 
As when two skilful hounds the leveret wind; 
Or chase through woods obscure the trembling hind; 
Now lost, now seen, they intercept his way, 
And from the herd still turn the flying prey: 
So fast, and with such fears, the Trojan flew; 
So close, so constant, the bold Greeks pursue. 
Now almost on the fleet the dastard falls, 
And mingles with the guards that watch the walls; 
When brave Tydides stoppa__d; a gena__rous thought 
(Inspired by Pallas) in his bosom wrought, 
Lest on the foe some forward Greek advance, 
And snatch the glory from his lifted lance. 
Then thus aloud: a_oeWhoea__er thou art, remain; 
This javelin else shall fix thee to the plain.a__ 
He said, and high in air the weapon cast, 
Which wilful erra__d, and oa__er his shoulder passa__d; 
Then fixa__d in earth. Against the trembling wood 
The wretch stood proppa__d, and quivera__d as he stood; 
A sudden palsy seized his turning head; 
His loose teeth chattera__d, and his colour fled; 
The panting warriors seize him as he stands, 
And with unmanly tears his life demands. 
a_oeO spare my youth, and for the breath I owe, 
Large gifts of price my father shall bestow: 
Vast heaps of brass shall in your ships be told, 
And steel well-tempera__d and refulgent gold.a__ 
To whom Ulysses made this wise reply: 
a_oeWhoea__er thou art, be bold, nor fear to die. 
What moves thee, say, when sleep has closed the sight, 
To roam the silent fields in dead of night? 
Cama__st thou the secrets of our camp to find, 
By Hector prompted, or thy daring mind? 
Or art some wretch by hopes of plunder led, 
Through heaps of carnage, to despoil the dead?a__ 
Then thus pale Dolon, with a fearful look: 
(Still, as he spoke, his limbs with horror shook:) 
[pg 190] 
a_oeHither I came, by Hectora__s words deceived; 
Much did he promise, rashly I believed: 
No less a bribe than great Achillesa__ car, 
And those swift steeds that sweep the ranks of war, 
Urged me, unwilling, this attempt to make; 
To learn what counsels, what resolves you take: 
If now subdued, you fix your hopes on flight, 
And, tired with toils, neglect the watch of night.a__ 
a_oeBold was thy aim, and glorious was the prize, 
(Ulysses, with a scornful smile, replies,) 
Far other rulers those proud steeds demand, 
And scorn the guidance of a vulgar hand; 
Even great Achilles scarce their rage can tame, 
Achilles sprung from an immortal dame. 
But say, be faithful, and the truth recite! 
Where lies encampa__d the Trojan chief to-night? 
Where stand his coursers? in what quarter sleep 
Their other princes? tell what watch they keep: 
Say, since this conquest, what their counsels are; 
Or here to combat, from their city far, 
Or back to Iliona__s walls transfer the war?a__ 
Ulysses thus, and thus Eumedesa__ son: 
a_oeWhat Dolon knows, his faithful tongue shall own. 
Hector, the peers assembling in his tent, 
A council holds at Ilusa__ monument. 
No certain guards the nightly watch partake; 
Wherea__er yon fires ascend, the Trojans wake: 
Anxious for Troy, the guard the natives keep; 
Safe in their cares, the auxiliar forces sleep, 
Whose wives and infants, from the danger far, 
Discharge their souls of half the fears of war.a__ 
a_oeThen sleep those aids among the Trojan train, 
(Inquired the chief,) or scattered oa__er the plain?a__ 
To whom the spy: a_oeTheir powers they thus dispose 
The Paeons, dreadful with their bended bows, 
The Carians, Caucons, the Pelasgian host, 
And Leleges, encamp along the coast. 
Not distant far, lie higher on the land 
The Lycian, Mysian, and Maeonian band, 
And Phrygiaa__s horse, by Thymbrasa__ ancient wall; 
The Thracians utmost, and apart from all. 
These Troy but lately to her succour won, 
Led on by Rhesus, great Eioneusa__ son: 
I saw his coursers in proud triumph go, 
Swift as the wind, and white as winter-snow; 
Rich silver plates his shining car infold; 
His solid arms, refulgent, flame with gold; 
No mortal shoulders suit the glorious load, 
Celestial panoply, to grace a god! 
Let me, unhappy, to your fleet be borne, 
[pg 191] 
Or leave me here, a captivea__s fate to mourn, 
In cruel chains, till your return reveal 
The truth or falsehood of the news I tell.a__ 
To this Tydides, with a gloomy frown: 
a_oeThink not to live, though all the truth be shown: 
Shall we dismiss thee, in some future strife 
To risk more bravely thy now forfeit life? 
Or that again our camps thou maya__st explore? 
Noa_"once a traitor, thou betraya__st no more.a__ 
Sternly he spoke, and as the wretch prepared 
With humble blandishment to stroke his beard, 
Like lightning swift the wrathful falchion flew, 
Divides the neck, and cuts the nerves in two; 
One instant snatcha__d his trembling soul to hell, 
The head, yet speaking, muttera__d as it fell. 
The furry helmet from his brow they tear, 
The wolfa__s grey hide, the unbended bow and spear; 
These great Ulysses lifting to the skies, 
To favouring Pallas dedicates the prize: 
a_oeGreat queen of arms, receive this hostile spoil, 
And let the Thracian steeds reward our toil; 
Thee, first of all the heavenly host, we praise; 
O speed our labours, and direct our ways!a__ 
This said, the spoils, with dropping gore defaced, 
High on a spreading tamarisk he placed; 
Then heapa__d with reeds and gathered boughs the plain, 
To guide their footsteps to the place again. 
Through the still night they cross the devious fields, 
Slippery with blood, oa__er arms and heaps of shields, 
Arriving where the Thracian squadrons lay, 
And eased in sleep the labours of the day. 
Ranged in three lines they view the prostrate band: 
The horses yoked beside each warrior stand. 
Their arms in order on the ground reclined, 
Through the brown shade the fulgid weapons shined: 
Amidst lay Rhesus, stretcha__d in sleep profound, 
And the white steeds behind his chariot bound. 
The welcome sight Ulysses first descries, 
And points to Diomed the tempting prize. 
a_oeThe man, the coursers, and the car behold! 
Described by Dolon, with the arms of gold. 
Now, brave Tydides! now thy courage try, 
Approach the chariot, and the steeds untie; 
Or if thy soul aspire to fiercer deeds, 
Urge thou the slaughter, while I seize the steeds.a__ 
Pallas (this said) her heroa__s bosom warms, 
Breathed in his heart, and strung his nervous arms; 
Wherea__er he passa__d, a purple stream pursued 
His thirsty falchion, fat with hostile blood, 
Bathed all his footsteps, dyed the fields with gore, 
[pg 192] 
And a low groan remurmura__d through the shore. 
So the grim lion, from his nightly den, 
Oa__erleaps the fences, and invades the pen, 
On sheep or goats, resistless in his way, 
He falls, and foaming rends the guardless prey; 
Nor stoppa__d the fury of his vengeful hand, 
Till twelve lay breathless of the Thracian band. 
Ulysses following, as his partner slew, 
Back by the foot each slaughtera__d warrior drew; 
The milk-white coursers studious to convey 
Safe to the ships, he wisely cleared the way: 
Lest the fierce steeds, not yet to battles bred, 
Should start, and tremble at the heaps of dead. 
Now twelve despatcha__d, the monarch last they found; 
Tydidesa__ falchion fixa__d him to the ground. 
Just then a deathful dream Minerva sent, 
A warlike form appeara__d before his tent, 
Whose visionary steel his bosom tore: 
So dreama__d the monarch, and awaked no more.218 
Ulysses now the snowy steeds detains, 
And leads them, fastena__d by the silver reins; 
These, with his bow unbent, he lasha__d along; 
(The scourge forgot, on Rhesusa__ chariot hung;) 
Then gave his friend the signal to retire; 
But him, new dangers, new achievements fire; 
Doubtful he stood, or with his reeking blade 
To send more heroes to the infernal shade, 
Drag off the car where Rhesusa__ armour lay, 
Or heave with manly force, and lift away. 
While unresolved the son of Tydeus stands, 
Pallas appears, and thus her chief commands: 
a_oeEnough, my son; from further slaughter cease, 
Regard thy safety, and depart in peace; 
Haste to the ships, the gotten spoils enjoy, 
Nor tempt too far the hostile gods of Troy.a__ 
The voice divine confessa__d the martial maid; 
In haste he mounted, and her word obeya__d; 
The coursers fly before Ulyssesa__ bow, 
Swift as the wind, and white as winter-snow. 
Not unobserved they passa__d: the god of light 
Had watcha__d his Troy, and marka__d Minervaa__s flight, 
Saw Tydeusa__ son with heavenly succour blessa__d, 
And vengeful anger filla__d his sacred breast. 
Swift to the Trojan camp descends the power, 
[pg 193] 
And wakes Hippocoon in the morning-hour; 
(On Rhesusa__ side accustoma__d to attend, 
A faithful kinsman, and instructive friend;) 
He rose, and saw the field deforma__d with blood, 
An empty space where late the coursers stood, 
The yet-warm Thracians panting on the coast; 
For each he wept, but for his Rhesus most: 
Now while on Rhesusa__ name he calls in vain, 
The gathering tumult spreads oa__er all the plain; 
On heaps the Trojans rush, with wild affright, 
And wondering view the slaughters of the night. 
Meanwhile the chiefs, arriving at the shade 
Where late the spoils of Hectora__s spy were laid, 
Ulysses stoppa__d; to him Tydides bore 
The trophy, dropping yet with Dolona__s gore: 
Then mounts again; again their nimbler feet 
The coursers ply, and thunder towards the fleet. 
Illustration: DIOMED AND ULYSSES RETURNING WITH THE SPOILS OF RHESUS. 
DIOMED AND ULYSSES RETURNING WITH THE SPOILS OF RHESUS. 
Old Nestor first perceived the approaching sound, 
Bespeaking thus the Grecian peers around: 
a_oeMethinks the noise of trampling steeds I hear, 
Thickening this way, and gathering on my ear; 
Perhaps some horses of the Trojan breed 
(So may, ye gods! my pious hopes succeed) 
The great Tydides and Ulysses bear, 
Returna__d triumphant with this prize of war. 
Yet much I fear (ah, may that fear be vain!) 
The chiefs outnumbera__d by the Trojan train; 
Perhaps, even now pursued, they seek the shore; 
Or, oh! perhaps those heroes are no more.a__ 
[pg 194] 
Scarce had he spoke, when, lo! the chiefs appear, 
And spring to earth; the Greeks dismiss their fear: 
With words of friendship and extended hands 
They greet the kings; and Nestor first demands: 
a_oeSay thou, whose praises all our host proclaim, 
Thou living glory of the Grecian name! 
Say whence these coursers? by what chance bestowa__d, 
The spoil of foes, or present of a god? 
Not those fair steeds, so radiant and so gay, 
That draw the burning chariot of the day. 
Old as I am, to age I scorn to yield, 
And daily mingle in the martial field; 
But sure till now no coursers struck my sight 
Like these, conspicuous through the ranks of fight. 
Some god, I deem, conferred the glorious prize, 
Blessa__d as ye are, and favourites of the skies; 
The care of him who bids the thunder roar, 
And her, whose fury bathes the world with gore.a__ 
a_oeFather! not so, (sage Ithacus rejoina__d,) 
The gifts of heaven are of a nobler kind. 
Of Thracian lineage are the steeds ye view, 
Whose hostile king the brave Tydides slew; 
Sleeping he died, with all his guards around, 
And twelve beside lay gasping on the ground. 
These other spoils from conquera__d Dolon came, 
A wretch, whose swiftness was his only fame; 
By Hector sent our forces to explore, 
He now lies headless on the sandy shore.a__ 
Then oa__er the trench the bounding coursers flew; 
The joyful Greeks with loud acclaim pursue. 
Straight to Tydidesa__ high pavilion borne, 
The matchless steeds his ample stalls adorn: 
The neighing coursers their new fellows greet, 
And the full racks are heapa__d with generous wheat. 
But Dolona__s armour, to his ships conveya__d, 
High on the painted stern Ulysses laid, 
A trophy destina__d to the blue-eyed maid. 
Now from nocturnal sweat and sanguine stain 
They cleanse their bodies in the neighba__ring main: 
Then in the polished bath, refresha__d from toil, 
Their joints they supple with dissolving oil, 
In due repast indulge the genial hour, 
And first to Pallas the libations pour: 
They sit, rejoicing in her aid divine, 
And the crowna__d goblet foams with floods of wine. 
[pg 195] 
BOOK XI. 
ARGUMENT 
THE THIRD BATTLE, AND THE ACTS OF AGAMEMNON. 
Agamemnon, having armed himself, leads the Grecians to battle; Hector 
prepares the Trojans to receive them, while Jupiter, Juno, and Minerva 
give the signals of war. Agamemnon bears all before him and Hector is 
commanded by Jupiter (who sends Iris for that purpose) to decline the 
engagement, till the king shall be wounded and retire from the field. 
He then makes a great slaughter of the enemy. Ulysses and Diomed put a 
stop to him for a time but the latter, being wounded by Paris, is 
obliged to desert his companion, who is encompassed by the Trojans, 
wounded, and in the utmost danger, till Menelaus and Ajax rescue him. 
Hector comes against Ajax, but that hero alone opposes multitudes, and 
rallies the Greeks. In the meantime Machaon, in the other wing of the 
army, is pierced with an arrow by Paris, and carried from the fight in 
Nestora__s chariot. Achilles (who overlooked the action from his ship) 
sent Patroclus to inquire which of the Greeks was wounded in that 
manner; Nestor entertains him in his tent with an account of the 
accidents of the day, and a long recital of some former wars which he 
remembered, tending to put Patroclus upon persuading Achilles to fight 
for his countrymen, or at least to permit him to do it, clad in 
Achillesa__ armour. Patroclus, on his return, meets Eurypylus also 
wounded, and assists him in that distress. 
This book opens with the eight and-twentieth day of the poem, and the 
same day, with its various actions and adventures is extended through 
the twelfth, thirteenth, fourteenth, fifteenth, sixteenth, seventeenth, 
and part of the eighteenth books. The scene lies in the field near the 
monument of Ilus. 
The saffron morn, with early blushes spread,219 
Now rose refulgent from Tithonusa__ bed; 
With new-born day to gladden mortal sight, 
And gild the courts of heaven with sacred light: 
When baleful Eris, sent by Jovea__s command, 
The torch of discord blazing in her hand, 
Through the red skies her bloody sign extends, 
And, wrapt in tempests, oa__er the fleet descends. 
High on Ulyssesa__ bark her horrid stand 
She took, and thundera__d through the seas and land. 
[pg 196] 
Even Ajax and Achilles heard the sound, 
Whose ships, remote, the guarded navy bound, 
Thence the black fury through the Grecian throng 
With horror sounds the loud Orthian song: 
The navy shakes, and at the dire alarms 
Each bosom boils, each warrior starts to arms. 
No more they sigh, inglorious to return, 
But breathe revenge, and for the combat burn. 
Illustration: THE DESCENT OF DISCORD. 
THE DESCENT OF DISCORD. 
The king of men his hardy host inspires 
With loud command, with great example fires! 
Himself first rose, himself before the rest 
His mighty limbs in radiant armour dressa__d, 
And first he cased his manly legs around 
In shining greaves with silver buckles bound; 
The beaming cuirass next adorna__d his breast, 
The same which once king Cinyras possessa__d: 
(The fame of Greece and her assembled host 
Had reacha__d that monarch on the Cyprian coast; 
a__Twas then, the friendship of the chief to gain, 
This glorious gift he sent, nor sent in vain:) 
Ten rows of azure steel the work infold, 
Twice ten of tin, and twelve of ductile gold; 
Three glittering dragons to the gorget rise, 
Whose imitated scales against the skies 
Reflected various light, and arching bowa__d, 
Like coloura__d rainbows oa__er a showery cloud 
(Jovea__s wondrous bow, of three celestial dies, 
Placed as a sign to man amidst the skies). 
[pg 197] 
A radiant baldric, oa__er his shoulder tied, 
Sustaina__d the sword that glittera__d at his side: 
Gold was the hilt, a silver sheath encased 
The shining blade, and golden hangers graced. 
His bucklera__s mighty orb was next displaya__d, 
That round the warrior cast a dreadful shade; 
Ten zones of brass its ample brim surround, 
And twice ten bosses the bright convex crowna__d: 
Tremendous Gorgon frowna__d upon its field, 
And circling terrors filla__d the expressive shield: 
Within its concave hung a silver thong, 
On which a mimic serpent creeps along, 
His azure length in easy waves extends, 
Till in three heads the embroidera__d monster ends. 
Last oa__er his brows his fourfold helm he placed, 
With nodding horse-hair formidably graced; 
And in his hands two steely javelins wields, 
That blaze to heaven, and lighten all the fields. 
That instant Juno, and the martial maid, 
In happy thunders promised Greece their aid; 
High oa__er the chief they clasha__d their arms in air, 
And, leaning from the clouds, expect the war. 
Close to the limits of the trench and mound, 
The fiery coursers to their chariots bound 
The squires restraina__d: the foot, with those who wield 
The lighter arms, rush forward to the field. 
To second these, in close array combined, 
The squadrons spread their sable wings behind. 
Now shouts and tumults wake the tardy sun, 
As with the light the warriorsa__ toils begun. 
Even Jove, whose thunder spoke his wrath, distilla__d 
Red drops of blood oa__er all the fatal field;220 
The woes of men unwilling to survey, 
And all the slaughters that must stain the day. 
Near Ilusa__ tomb, in order ranged around, 
The Trojan lines possessa__d the rising ground: 
There wise Polydamas and Hector stood; 
A_neas, honoura__d as a guardian god; 
Bold Polybus, Agenor the divine; 
The brother-warriors of Antenora__s line: 
With youthful Acamas, whose beauteous face 
And fair proportion matcha__d the ethereal race. 
Great Hector, covera__d with his spacious shield, 
Plies all the troops, and orders all the field. 
As the red star now shows his sanguine fires 
Through the dark clouds, and now in night retires, 
[pg 198] 
Thus through the ranks appeara__d the godlike man, 
Plunged in the rear, or blazing in the van; 
While streamy sparkles, restless as he flies, 
Flash from his arms, as lightning from the skies. 
As sweating reapers in some wealthy field, 
Ranged in two bands, their crooked weapons wield, 
Bear down the furrows, till their labours meet; 
Thick fall the heapy harvests at their feet: 
So Greece and Troy the field of war divide, 
And falling ranks are strowa__d on every side. 
None stoopa__d a thought to base inglorious flight;221 
But horse to horse, and man to man they fight, 
Not rabid wolves more fierce contest their prey; 
Each wounds, each bleeds, but none resign the day. 
Discord with joy the scene of death descries, 
And drinks large slaughter at her sanguine eyes: 
Discord alone, of all the immortal train, 
Swells the red horrors of this direful plain: 
The gods in peace their golden mansions fill, 
Ranged in bright order on the Olympian hill: 
But general murmurs told their griefs above, 
And each accused the partial will of Jove. 
Meanwhile apart, superior, and alone, 
The eternal Monarch, on his awful throne, 
Wrapt in the blaze of boundless glory sate; 
And fixa__d, fulfilla__d the just decrees of fate. 
On earth he turna__d his all-considering eyes, 
And marka__d the spot where Iliona__s towers arise; 
The sea with ships, the fields with armies spread, 
The victora__s rage, the dying, and the dead. 
Thus while the morning-beams, increasing bright, 
Oa__er heavena__s pure azure spread the glowing light, 
Commutual death the fate of war confounds, 
Each adverse battle gored with equal wounds. 
But now (what time in some sequestera__d vale 
The weary woodman spreads his sparing meal, 
When his tired arms refuse the axe to rear, 
And claim a respite from the sylvan war; 
But not till half the prostrate forests lay 
Stretcha__d in long ruin, and exposed to day) 
Then, nor till then, the Greeksa__ impulsive might 
Pierced the black phalanx, and let in the light. 
Great Agamemnon then the slaughter led, 
And slew Bienor at his peoplea__s head: 
Whose squire Oileus, with a sudden spring, 
Leapa__d from the chariot to revenge his king; 
But in his front he felt the fatal wound, 
[pg 199] 
Which pierced his brain, and stretcha__d him on the ground. 
Atrides spoila__d, and left them on the plain: 
Vain was their youth, their glittering armour vain: 
Now soila__d with dust, and naked to the sky, 
Their snowy limbs and beauteous bodies lie. 
Two sons of Priam next to battle move, 
The product, one of marriage, one of love:222 
In the same car the brother-warriors ride; 
This took the charge to combat, that to guide: 
Far other task, than when they wont to keep, 
On Idaa__s tops, their fathera__s fleecy sheep. 
These on the mountains once Achilles found, 
And captive led, with pliant osiers bound; 
Then to their sire for ample sums restored; 
But now to perish by Atridesa__ sword: 
Pierced in the breast the base-born Isus bleeds: 
Cleft through the head his brothera__s fate succeeds, 
Swift to the spoil the hasty victor falls, 
And, stript, their features to his mind recalls. 
The Trojans see the youths untimely die, 
But helpless tremble for themselves, and fly. 
So when a lion ranging oa__er the lawns. 
Finds, on some grassy lair, the couching fawns, 
Their bones he cracks, their reeking vitals draws, 
And grinds the quivering flesh with bloody jaws; 
The frighted hind beholds, and dares not stay, 
But swift through rustling thickets bursts her way; 
All drowna__d in sweat, the panting mother flies, 
And the big tears roll trickling from her eyes. 
Amidst the tumult of the routed train, 
The sons of false Antimachus were slain; 
He who for bribes his faithless counsels sold, 
And voted Helena__s stay for Parisa__ gold. 
Atrides marka__d, as these their safety sought, 
And slew the children for the fathera__s fault; 
Their headstrong horse unable to restrain, 
They shook with fear, and droppa__d the silken rein; 
Then in the chariot on their knees they fall, 
And thus with lifted hands for mercy call: 
a_oeO spare our youth, and for the life we owe, 
Antimachus shall copious gifts bestow: 
Soon as he hears, that, not in battle slain, 
The Grecian ships his captive sons detain, 
Large heaps of brass in ransom shall be told, 
And steel well-tempered, and persuasive gold.a__ 
These words, attended with the flood of tears, 
The youths addressa__d to unrelenting ears: 
[pg 200] 
The vengeful monarch gave this stern reply: 
a_oeIf from Antimachus ye spring, ye die; 
The daring wretch who once in council stood 
To shed Ulyssesa__ and my brothera__s blood, 
For proffera__d peace! and sues his seed for grace? 
No, die, and pay the forfeit of your race.a__ 
This said, Pisander from the car he cast, 
And pierced his breast: supine he breathed his last. 
His brother leapa__d to earth; but, as he lay, 
The trenchant falchion loppa__d his hands away; 
His severa__d head was tossa__d among the throng, 
And, rolling, drew a bloody train along. 
Then, where the thickest fought, the victor flew; 
The kinga__s example all his Greeks pursue. 
Now by the foot the flying foot were slain, 
Horse trod by horse, lay foaming on the plain. 
From the dry fields thick clouds of dust arise, 
Shade the black host, and intercept the skies. 
The brass-hoofa__d steeds tumultuous plunge and bound, 
And the thick thunder beats the labouring ground, 
Still slaughtering on, the king of men proceeds; 
The distanced army wonders at his deeds, 
As when the winds with raging flames conspire, 
And oa__er the forests roll the flood of fire, 
In blazing heaps the grovea__s old honours fall, 
And one refulgent ruin levels all: 
Before Atridesa__ rage so sinks the foe, 
Whole squadrons vanish, and proud heads lie low. 
The steeds fly trembling from his waving sword, 
And many a car, now lighted of its lord, 
Wide oa__er the field with guideless fury rolls, 
Breaking their ranks, and crushing out their souls; 
While his keen falchion drinks the warriorsa__ lives; 
More grateful, now, to vultures than their wives! 
Perhaps great Hector then had found his fate, 
But Jove and destiny prolonga__d his date. 
Safe from the darts, the care of heaven he stood, 
Amidst alarms, and death, and dust, and blood. 
Now past the tomb where ancient Ilus lay, 
Through the mid field the routed urge their way: 
Where the wild figs the adjoining summit crown, 
The path they take, and speed to reach the town. 
As swift, Atrides with loud shouts pursued, 
Hot with his toil, and bathed in hostile blood. 
Now near the beech-tree, and the Scaean gates, 
The hero halts, and his associates waits. 
Meanwhile on every side around the plain, 
Dispersed, disordera__d, fly the Trojan train. 
So flies a herd of beeves, that hear dismaya__d 
The liona__s roaring through the midnight shade; 
[pg 201] 
On heaps they tumble with successless haste; 
The savage seizes, draws, and rends the last. 
Not with less fury stern Atrides flew, 
Still pressa__d the rout, and still the hindmost slew; 
Hurla__d from their cars the bravest chiefs are killa__d, 
And rage, and death, and carnage load the field. 
Now storms the victor at the Trojan wall; 
Surveys the towers, and meditates their fall. 
But Jove descending shook the Idaean hills, 
And down their summits poura__d a hundred rills: 
The unkindled lightning in his hand he took, 
And thus the many-coloured maid bespoke: 
a_oeIris, with haste thy golden wings display, 
To godlike Hector this our word conveya_" 
While Agamemnon wastes the ranks around, 
Fights in the front, and bathes with blood the ground, 
Bid him give way; but issue forth commands, 
And trust the war to less important hands: 
But when, or wounded by the spear or dart, 
That chief shall mount his chariot, and depart, 
Then Jove shall string his arm, and fire his breast, 
Then to her ships shall flying Greece be pressa__d, 
Till to the main the burning sun descend, 
And sacred night her awful shade extend.a__ 
He spoke, and Iris at his word obeya__d; 
On wings of winds descends the various maid. 
The chief she found amidst the ranks of war, 
Close to the bulwarks, on his glittering car. 
The goddess then: a_oeO son of Priam, hear! 
From Jove I come, and his high mandate bear. 
While Agamemnon wastes the ranks around, 
Fights in the front, and bathes with blood the ground, 
Abstain from fight; yet issue forth commands, 
And trust the war to less important hands: 
But when, or wounded by the spear or dart, 
The chief shall mount his chariot, and depart, 
Then Jove shall string thy arm, and fire thy breast, 
Then to her ships shall flying Greece be pressa__d, 
Till to the main the burning sun descend, 
And sacred night her awful shade extend.a__ 
She said, and vanisha__d. Hector, with a bound, 
Springs from his chariot on the trembling ground, 
In clanging arms: he grasps in either hand 
A pointed lance, and speeds from band to band; 
Revives their ardour, turns their steps from flight, 
And wakes anew the dying flames of fight. 
They stand to arms: the Greeks their onset dare, 
Condense their powers, and wait the coming war. 
New force, new spirit, to each breast returns; 
The fight renewa__d with fiercer fury burns: 
[pg 202] 
The king leads on: all fix on him their eye, 
And learn from him to conquer, or to die. 
Ye sacred nine! celestial Muses! tell, 
Who faced him first, and by his prowess fell? 
The great Iphidamas, the bold and young, 
From sage Antenor and Theano sprung; 
Whom from his youth his grandsire Cisseus bred, 
And nursed in Thrace where snowy flocks are fed. 
Scarce did the down his rosy cheeks invest, 
And early honour warm his generous breast, 
When the kind sire consigna__d his daughtera__s charms 
(Theanoa__s sister) to his youthful arms. 
But calla__d by glory to the wars of Troy, 
He leaves untasted the first fruits of joy; 
From his loved bride departs with melting eyes, 
And swift to aid his dearer country flies. 
With twelve black ships he reacha__d Percopea__s strand, 
Thence took the long laborious march by land. 
Now fierce for fame, before the ranks he springs, 
Towering in arms, and braves the king of kings. 
Atrides first discharged the missive spear; 
The Trojan stoopa__d, the javelin passa__d in air. 
Then near the corslet, at the monarcha__s heart, 
With all his strength, the youth directs his dart: 
But the broad belt, with plates of silver bound, 
The point rebated, and repella__d the wound. 
Encumbera__d with the dart, Atrides stands, 
Till, graspa__d with force, he wrencha__d it from his hands; 
At once his weighty sword discharged a wound 
Full on his neck, that fella__d him to the ground. 
Stretcha__d in the dust the unhappy warrior lies, 
And sleep eternal seals his swimming eyes. 
Oh worthy better fate! oh early slain! 
Thy countrya__s friend; and virtuous, though in vain! 
No more the youth shall join his consorta__s side, 
At once a virgin, and at once a bride! 
No more with presents her embraces meet, 
Or lay the spoils of conquest at her feet, 
On whom his passion, lavish of his store, 
Bestowa__d so much, and vainly promised more! 
Unwept, uncovera__d, on the plain he lay, 
While the proud victor bore his arms away. 
Coon, Antenora__s eldest hope, was nigh: 
Tears, at the sight, came starting from his eye, 
While pierced with grief the much-loved youth he viewa__d, 
And the pale features now deforma__d with blood. 
Then, with his spear, unseen, his time he took, 
Aima__d at the king, and near his elbow strook. 
The thrilling steel transpierced the brawny part, 
And through his arm stood forth the barbed dart. 
[pg 203] 
Surprised the monarch feels, yet void of fear 
On Coon rushes with his lifted spear: 
His brothera__s corpse the pious Trojan draws, 
And calls his country to assert his cause; 
Defends him breathless on the sanguine field, 
And oa__er the body spreads his ample shield. 
Atrides, marking an unguarded part, 
Transfixa__d the warrior with his brazen dart; 
Prone on his brothera__s bleeding breast he lay, 
The monarcha__s falchion loppa__d his head away: 
The social shades the same dark journey go, 
And join each other in the realms below. 
The vengeful victor rages round the fields, 
With every weapon art or fury yields: 
By the long lance, the sword, or ponderous stone, 
Whole ranks are broken, and whole troops oa__erthrown. 
This, while yet warm distilla__d the purple flood; 
But when the wound grew stiff with clotted blood, 
Then grinding tortures his strong bosom rend, 
Less keen those darts the fierce Ilythiae send: 
(The powers that cause the teeming matrona__s throes, 
Sad mothers of unutterable woes!) 
Stung with the smart, all-panting with the pain, 
He mounts the car, and gives his squire the rein; 
Then with a voice which fury made more strong, 
And pain augmented, thus exhorts the throng: 
a_oeO friends! O Greeks! assert your honours won; 
Proceed, and finish what this arm begun: 
Lo! angry Jove forbids your chief to stay, 
And envies half the glories of the day.a__ 
He said: the driver whirls his lengthful thong; 
The horses fly; the chariot smokes along. 
Clouds from their nostrils the fierce coursers blow, 
And from their sides the foam descends in snow; 
Shot through the battle in a momenta__s space, 
The wounded monarch at his tent they place. 
No sooner Hector saw the king retired, 
But thus his Trojans and his aids he fired: 
a_oeHear, all ye Dardan, all ye Lycian race! 
Famed in close fight, and dreadful face to face: 
Now call to mind your ancient trophies won, 
Your great forefathersa__ virtues, and your own. 
Behold, the general flies! deserts his powers! 
Lo, Jove himself declares the conquest ours! 
Now on yon ranks impel your foaming steeds; 
And, sure of glory, dare immortal deeds.a__ 
With words like these the fiery chief alarms 
His fainting host, and every bosom warms. 
As the bold hunter cheers his hounds to tear 
The brindled lion, or the tusky bear: 
[pg 204] 
With voice and hand provokes their doubting heart, 
And springs the foremost with his lifted dart: 
So godlike Hector prompts his troops to dare; 
Nor prompts alone, but leads himself the war. 
On the black body of the foe he pours; 
As from the clouda__s deep bosom, swella__d with showers, 
A sudden storm the purple ocean sweeps, 
Drives the wild waves, and tosses all the deeps. 
Say, Muse! when Jove the Trojana__s glory crowna__d, 
Beneath his arm what heroes bit the ground? 
Assaeus, Dolops, and Autonous died, 
Opites next was added to their side; 
Then brave Hipponous, famed in many a fight, 
Opheltius, Orus, sunk to endless night; 
A_symnus, Agelaus; all chiefs of name; 
The rest were vulgar deaths unknown to fame. 
As when a western whirlwind, charged with storms, 
Dispels the gathera__d clouds that Notus forms: 
The gust continued, violent and strong, 
Rolls sable clouds in heaps on heaps along; 
Now to the skies the foaming billows rears, 
Now breaks the surge, and wide the bottom bares: 
Thus, raging Hector, with resistless hands, 
Oa__erturns, confounds, and scatters all their bands. 
Now the last ruin the whole host appals; 
Now Greece had trembled in her wooden walls; 
But wise Ulysses calla__d Tydides forth, 
His soul rekindled, and awaked his worth. 
a_oeAnd stand we deedless, O eternal shame! 
Till Hectora__s arm involve the ships in flame? 
Haste, let us join, and combat side by side.a__ 
The warrior thus, and thus the friend replied: 
a_oeNo martial toil I shun, no danger fear; 
Let Hector come; I wait his fury here. 
But Jove with conquest crowns the Trojan train: 
And, Jove our foe, all human force is vain.a__ 
He sigha__d; but, sighing, raised his vengeful steel, 
And from his car the proud Thymbraeus fell: 
Molion, the charioteer, pursued his lord, 
His death ennobled by Ulyssesa__ sword. 
There slain, they left them in eternal night, 
Then plunged amidst the thickest ranks of fight. 
So two wild boars outstrip the following hounds, 
Then swift revert, and wounds return for wounds. 
Stern Hectora__s conquests in the middle plain 
Stood checka__d awhile, and Greece respired again. 
The sons of Merops shone amidst the war; 
Towering they rode in one refulgent car: 
In deep prophetic arts their father skilla__d, 
Had warna__d his children from the Trojan field. 
[pg 205] 
Fate urged them on: the father warna__d in vain; 
They rusha__d to fight, and perisha__d on the plain; 
Their breasts no more the vital spirit warms; 
The stern Tydides strips their shining arms. 
Hypirochus by great Ulysses dies, 
And rich Hippodamus becomes his prize. 
Great Jove from Ide with slaughter fills his sight, 
And level hangs the doubtful scale of fight. 
By Tydeusa__ lance Agastrophus was slain, 
The far-famed hero of Paeonian strain; 
Winga__d with his fears, on foot he strove to fly, 
His steeds too distant, and the foe too nigh: 
Through broken orders, swifter than the wind, 
He fled, but flying left his life behind. 
This Hector sees, as his experienced eyes 
Traverse the files, and to the rescue flies; 
Shouts, as he passa__d, the crystal regions rend, 
And moving armies on his march attend. 
Great Diomed himself was seized with fear, 
And thus bespoke his brother of the war: 
a_oeMark how this way yon bending squadrons yield! 
The storm rolls on, and Hector rules the field: 
Here stand his utmost force.a__a_"The warrior said; 
Swift at the word his ponderous javelin fled; 
Nor missa__d its aim, but where the plumage danced 
Razed the smooth cone, and thence obliquely glanced. 
Safe in his helm (the gift of Phoebusa__ hands) 
Without a wound the Trojan hero stands; 
But yet so stunna__d, that, staggering on the plain. 
His arm and knee his sinking bulk sustain; 
Oa__er his dim sight the misty vapours rise, 
And a short darkness shades his swimming eyes. 
Tydides followed to regain his lance; 
While Hector rose, recovera__d from the trance, 
Remounts his car, and herds amidst the crowd: 
The Greek pursues him, and exults aloud: 
a_oeOnce more thank Phoebus for thy forfeit breath, 
Or thank that swiftness which outstrips the death. 
Well by Apollo are thy prayers repaid, 
And oft that partial power has lent his aid. 
Thou shall not long the death deserved withstand, 
If any god assist Tydidesa__ hand. 
Fly then, inglorious! but thy flight, this day, 
Whole hecatombs of Trojan ghosts shall pay,a__ 
Him, while he triumpha__d, Paris eyed from far, 
(The spouse of Helen, the fair cause of war;) 
Around the fields his feathera__d shafts he sent, 
From ancient Ilusa__ ruina__d monument: 
Behind the column placed, he bent his bow, 
And winga__d an arrow at the unwary foe; 
[pg 206] 
Just as he stoopa__d, Agastrophusa__s crest 
To seize, and drew the corslet from his breast, 
The bowstring twanga__d; nor flew the shaft in vain, 
But pierced his foot, and naila__d it to the plain. 
The laughing Trojan, with a joyful spring. 
Leaps from his ambush, and insults the king. 
a_oeHe bleeds! (he cries) some god has sped my dart! 
Would the same god had fixa__d it in his heart! 
So Troy, relieved from that wide-wasting hand, 
Should breathe from slaughter and in combat stand: 
Whose sons now tremble at his darted spear, 
As scattera__d lambs the rushing lion fear.a__ 
He dauntless thus: a_oeThou conqueror of the fair, 
Thou woman-warrior with the curling hair; 
Vain archer! trusting to the distant dart, 
Unskilla__d in arms to act a manly part! 
Thou hast but done what boys or women can; 
Such hands may wound, but not incense a man. 
Nor boast the scratch thy feeble arrow gave, 
A cowarda__s weapon never hurts the brave. 
Not so this dart, which thou maya__st one day feel; 
Fate wings its flight, and death is on the steel: 
Where this but lights, some noble life expires; 
Its touch makes orphans, bathes the cheeks of sires, 
Steeps earth in purple, gluts the birds of air, 
And leaves such objects as distract the fair.a__ 
Ulysses hastens with a trembling heart, 
Before him steps, and bending draws the dart: 
Forth flows the blood; an eager pang succeeds; 
Tydides mounts, and to the navy speeds. 
Now on the field Ulysses stands alone, 
The Greeks all fled, the Trojans pouring on; 
But stands collected in himself, and whole, 
And questions thus his own unconquera__d soul: 
a_oeWhat further subterfuge, what hopes remain? 
What shame, inglorious if I quit the plain? 
What danger, singly if I stand the ground, 
My friends all scattera__d, all the foes around? 
Yet wherefore doubtful? let this truth suffice, 
The brave meets danger, and the coward flies. 
To die or conquer, proves a heroa__s heart; 
And, knowing this, I know a soldiera__s part.a__ 
Such thoughts revolving in his careful breast, 
Near, and more near, the shady cohorts pressa__d; 
These, in the warrior, their own fate enclose; 
And round him deep the steely circle grows. 
So fares a boar whom all the troop surrounds 
Of shouting huntsmen and of clamorous hounds; 
He grinds his ivory tusks; he foams with ire; 
His sanguine eye-balls glare with living fire; 
[pg 207] 
By these, by those, on every part is plied; 
And the red slaughter spreads on every side. 
Pierced through the shoulder, first Deiopis fell; 
Next Ennomus and Thoon sank to hell; 
Chersidamas, beneath the navel thrust, 
Falls prone to earth, and grasps the bloody dust. 
Charops, the son of Hippasus, was near; 
Ulysses reacha__d him with the fatal spear; 
But to his aid his brother Socus flies, 
Socus the brave, the generous, and the wise. 
Near as he drew, the warrior thus began: 
a_oeO great Ulysses! much-enduring man! 
Not deeper skilla__d in every martial sleight, 
Than worn to toils, and active in the fight! 
This day two brothers shall thy conquest grace, 
And end at once the great Hippasian race, 
Or thou beneath this lance must press the field.a__ 
He said, and forceful pierced his spacious shield: 
Through the strong brass the ringing javelin thrown, 
Plougha__d half his side, and bared it to the bone. 
By Pallasa__ care, the spear, though deep infixa__d, 
Stoppa__d short of life, nor with his entrails mixa__d. 
The wound not mortal wise Ulysses knew, 
Then furious thus (but first some steps withdrew): 
a_oeUnhappy man! whose death our hands shall grace, 
Fate calls thee hence and finisha__d is thy race. 
Nor longer check my conquests on the foe; 
But, pierced by this, to endless darkness go, 
And add one spectre to the realms below!a__ 
He spoke, while Socus, seized with sudden fright, 
Trembling gave way, and turna__d his back to flight; 
Between his shoulders pierced the following dart, 
And held its passage through the panting heart: 
Wide in his breast appeara__d the grisly wound; 
He falls; his armour rings against the ground. 
Then thus Ulysses, gazing on the slain: 
a_oeFamed son of Hippasus! there press the plain; 
There ends thy narrow span assigna__d by fate, 
Heaven owes Ulysses yet a longer date. 
Ah, wretch! no father shall thy corpse compose; 
Thy dying eyes no tender mother close; 
But hungry birds shall tear those balls away, 
And hovering vultures scream around their prey. 
Me Greece shall honour, when I meet my doom, 
With solemn funerals and a lasting tomb.a__ 
Then raging with intolerable smart, 
He writhes his body, and extracts the dart. 
The dart a tide of spouting gore pursued, 
And gladdena__d Troy with sight of hostile blood. 
Now troops on troops the fainting chief invade, 
[pg 208] 
Forced he recedes, and loudly calls for aid. 
Thrice to its pitch his lofty voice he rears; 
The well-known voice thrice Menelaus hears: 
Alarma__d, to Ajax Telamon he cried, 
Who shares his labours, and defends his side: 
a_oeO friend! Ulyssesa__ shouts invade my ear; 
Distressed he seems, and no assistance near; 
Strong as he is, yet one opposed to all, 
Oppressa__d by multitudes, the best may fall. 
Greece robba__d of him must bid her host despair, 
And feel a loss not ages can repair.a__ 
Then, where the cry directs, his course he bends; 
Great Ajax, like the god of war, attends, 
The prudent chief in sore distress they found, 
With bands of furious Trojans compassa__d round.223 
As when some huntsman, with a flying spear, 
From the blind thicket wounds a stately deer; 
Down his cleft side, while fresh the blood distils, 
He bounds aloft, and scuds from hills to hills, 
Till lifea__s warm vapour issuing through the wound, 
Wild mountain-wolves the fainting beast surround: 
Just as their jaws his prostrate limbs invade, 
The lion rushes through the woodland shade, 
The wolves, though hungry, scour dispersed away; 
The lordly savage vindicates his prey. 
Ulysses thus, unconquera__d by his pains, 
A single warrior half a host sustains: 
But soon as Ajax leaves his tower-like shield, 
The scattered crowds fly frighted oa__er the field; 
Atridesa__ arm the sinking hero stays, 
And, saved from numbers, to his car conveys. 
Victorious Ajax plies the routed crew; 
And first Doryclus, Priama__s son, he slew, 
On strong Pandocus next inflicts a wound, 
And lays Lysander bleeding on the ground. 
As when a torrent, swella__d with wintry rains, 
Pours from the mountains oa__er the deluged plains, 
And pines and oaks, from their foundations torn, 
A countrya__s ruins! to the seas are borne: 
Fierce Ajax thus oa__erwhelms the yielding throng; 
Men, steeds, and chariots, roll in heaps along. 
But Hector, from this scene of slaughter far, 
Raged on the left, and ruled the tide of war: 
[pg 209] 
Loud groans proclaim his progress through the plain, 
And deep Scamander swells with heaps of slain. 
There Nestor and Idomeneus oppose 
The warriora__s fury; there the battle glows; 
There fierce on foot, or from the chariota__s height, 
His sword deforms the beauteous ranks of fight. 
The spouse of Helen, dealing darts around, 
Had pierced Machaon with a distant wound: 
In his right shoulder the broad shaft appeara__d, 
And trembling Greece for her physician feara__d. 
To Nestor then Idomeneus begun: 
a_oeGlory of Greece, old Neleusa__ valiant son! 
Ascend thy chariot, haste with speed away, 
And great Machaon to the ships convey; 
A wise physician skilla__d our wounds to heal, 
Is more than armies to the public weal.a__ 
Old Nestor mounts the seat; beside him rode 
The wounded offspring of the healing god. 
He lends the lash; the steeds with sounding feet 
Shake the dry field, and thunder toward the fleet. 
But now Cebriones, from Hectora__s car, 
Surveya__d the various fortune of the war: 
a_oeWhile here (he cried) the flying Greeks are slain, 
Trojans on Trojans yonder load the plain. 
Before great Ajax see the mingled throng 
Of men and chariots driven in heaps along! 
I know him well, distinguisha__d oa__er the field 
By the broad glittering of the sevenfold shield. 
Thither, O Hector, thither urge thy steeds, 
There danger calls, and there the combat bleeds; 
There horse and foot in mingled deaths unite, 
And groans of slaughter mix with shouts of fight.a__ 
Thus having spoke, the drivera__s lash resounds; 
Swift through the ranks the rapid chariot bounds; 
Stung by the stroke, the coursers scour the fields, 
Oa__er heaps of carcases, and hills of shields. 
The horsesa__ hoofs are bathed in heroesa__ gore, 
And, dashing, purple all the car before; 
The groaning axle sable drops distils, 
And mangled carnage clogs the rapid wheels. 
Here Hector, plunging through the thickest fight, 
Broke the dark phalanx, and let in the light: 
(By the long lance, the sword, or ponderous stone. 
The ranks he scattera__d and the troops oa__erthrown:) 
Ajax he shuns, through all the dire debate, 
And fears that arm whose force he felt so late. 
But partial Jove, espousing Hectora__s part, 
Shot heaven-bred horror through the Greciana__s heart; 
Confused, unnerved in Hectora__s presence grown, 
Amazed he stood, with terrors not his own. 
[pg 210] 
Oa__er his broad back his moony shield he threw, 
And, glaring round, by tardy steps withdrew. 
Thus the grim lion his retreat maintains, 
Beset with watchful dogs, and shouting swains; 
Repulsed by numbers from the nightly stalls, 
Though rage impels him, and though hunger calls, 
Long stands the showering darts, and missile fires; 
Then sourly slow the indignant beast retires: 
So turna__d stern Ajax, by whole hosts repella__d, 
While his swoln heart at every step rebella__d. 
As the slow beast, with heavy strength endued, 
In some wide field by troops of boys pursued, 
Though round his sides a wooden tempest rain, 
Crops the tall harvest, and lays waste the plain; 
Thick on his hide the hollow blows resound, 
The patient animal maintains his ground, 
Scarce from the field with all their efforts chased, 
And stirs but slowly when he stirs at last: 
On Ajax thus a weight of Trojans hung, 
The strokes redoubled on his buckler rung; 
Confiding now in bulky strength he stands, 
Now turns, and backward bears the yielding bands; 
Now stiff recedes, yet hardly seems to fly, 
And threats his followers with retorted eye. 
Fixa__d as the bar between two warring powers, 
While hissing darts descend in iron showers: 
In his broad buckler many a weapon stood, 
Its surface bristled with a quivering wood; 
And many a javelin, guiltless on the plain, 
Marks the dry dust, and thirsts for blood in vain. 
But bold Eurypylus his aid imparts, 
And dauntless springs beneath a cloud of darts; 
Whose eager javelin launcha__d against the foe, 
Great Apisaon felt the fatal blow; 
From his torn liver the red current flowa__d, 
And his slack knees desert their dying load. 
The victor rushing to despoil the dead, 
From Parisa__ bow a vengeful arrow fled; 
Fixa__d in his nervous thigh the weapon stood, 
Fixa__d was the point, but broken was the wood. 
Back to the lines the wounded Greek retired, 
Yet thus retreating, his associates fired: 
a_oeWhat god, O Grecians! has your hearts dismaya__d? 
Oh, turn to arms; a__tis Ajax claims your aid. 
This hour he stands the mark of hostile rage, 
And this the last brave battle he shall wage: 
Haste, join your forces; from the gloomy grave 
The warrior rescue, and your country save.a__ 
Thus urged the chief: a generous troop appears, 
Who spread their bucklers, and advance their spears, 
[pg 211] 
To guard their wounded friend: while thus they stand 
With pious care, great Ajax joins the band: 
Each takes new courage at the heroa__s sight; 
The hero rallies, and renews the fight. 
Thus raged both armies like conflicting fires, 
While Nestora__s chariot far from fight retires: 
His coursers steepa__d in sweat, and staina__d with gore, 
The Greeksa__ preserver, great Machaon, bore. 
That hour Achilles, from the topmost height 
Of his proud fleet, oa__erlooka__d the fields of fight; 
His feasted eyes beheld around the plain 
The Grecian rout, the slaying, and the slain. 
His friend Machaon singled from the rest, 
A transient pity toucha__d his vengeful breast. 
Straight to Menoetiusa__ much-loved son he sent: 
Graceful as Mars, Patroclus quits his tent; 
In evil hour! Then fate decreed his doom, 
And fixa__d the date of all his woes to come. 
a_oeWhy calls my friend? thy loved injunctions lay; 
Whatea__er thy will, Patroclus shall obey.a__ 
a_oeO first of friends! (Pelides thus replied) 
Still at my heart, and ever at my side! 
The time is come, when yon despairing host 
Shall learn the value of the man they lost: 
Now at my knees the Greeks shall pour their moan, 
And proud Atrides tremble on his throne. 
Go now to Nestor, and from him be taught 
What wounded warrior late his chariot brought: 
For, seen at distance, and but seen behind, 
His form recalla__d Machaon to my mind; 
Nor could I, through yon cloud, discern his face, 
The coursers passa__d me with so swift a pace.a__ 
The hero said. His friend obeya__d with haste, 
Through intermingled ships and tents he passa__d; 
The chiefs descending from their car he found: 
The panting steeds Eurymedon unbound. 
The warriors standing on the breezy shore, 
To dry their sweat, and wash away the gore, 
Here paused a moment, while the gentle gale 
Conveya__d that freshness the cool seas exhale; 
Then to consult on farther methods went, 
And took their seats beneath the shady tent. 
The draught prescribed, fair Hecamede prepares, 
Arsinousa__ daughter, graced with golden hairs: 
(Whom to his aged arms, a royal slave, 
Greece, as the prize of Nestora__s wisdom gave:) 
A table first with azure feet she placed; 
Whose ample orb a brazen charger graced; 
Honey new-pressa__d, the sacred flour of wheat, 
And wholesome garlic, crowna__d the savoury treat, 
[pg 212] 
Next her white hand an antique goblet brings, 
A goblet sacred to the Pylian kings 
From eldest times: embossa__d with studs of gold, 
Two feet support it, and four handles hold; 
On each bright handle, bending oa__er the brink, 
In sculptured gold, two turtles seem to drink: 
A massy weight, yet heaved with ease by him, 
When the brisk nectar overlooka__d the brim. 
Tempera__d in this, the nymph of form divine 
Pours a large portion of the Pramnian wine; 
With goata__s-milk cheese a flavourous taste bestows, 
And last with flour the smiling surface strows: 
This for the wounded prince the dame prepares: 
The cordial beverage reverend Nestor shares: 
Salubrious draughts the warriorsa__ thirst allay, 
And pleasing conference beguiles the day. 
Meantime Patroclus, by Achilles sent, 
Unheard approached, and stood before the tent. 
Old Nestor, rising then, the hero led 
To his high seat: the chief refused and said: 
a_oea__Tis now no season for these kind delays; 
The great Achilles with impatience stays. 
To great Achilles this respect I owe; 
Who asks, what hero, wounded by the foe, 
Was borne from combat by thy foaming steeds? 
With grief I see the great Machaon bleeds. 
This to report, my hasty course I bend; 
Thou knowa__st the fiery temper of my friend.a__ 
a_oeCan then the sons of Greece (the sage rejoina__d) 
Excite compassion in Achillesa__ mind? 
Seeks he the sorrows of our host to know? 
This is not half the story of our woe. 
Tell him, not great Machaon bleeds alone, 
Our bravest heroes in the navy groan, 
Ulysses, Agamemnon, Diomed, 
And stern Eurypylus, already bleed. 
But, ah! what flattering hopes I entertain! 
Achilles heeds not, but derides our pain: 
Even till the flames consume our fleet he stays, 
And waits the rising of the fatal blaze. 
Chief after chief the raging foe destroys; 
Calm he looks on, and every death enjoys. 
Now the slow course of all-impairing time 
Unstrings my nerves, and ends my manly prime; 
Oh! had I still that strength my youth possessa__d, 
When this bold arm the Epeian powers oppressa__d, 
The bulls of Elis in glad triumph led, 
And stretcha__d the great Itymonaeus dead! 
Then from my fury fled the trembling swains, 
And ours was all the plunder of the plains: 
[pg 213] 
Fifty white flocks, full fifty herds of swine, 
As many goats, as many lowing kine: 
And thrice the number of unrivalla__d steeds, 
All teeming females, and of generous breeds. 
These, as my first essay of arms, I won; 
Old Neleus gloried in his conquering son. 
Thus Elis forced, her long arrears restored, 
And shares were parted to each Pylian lord. 
The state of Pyle was sunk to last despair, 
When the proud Elians first commenced the war: 
For Neleusa__ sons Alcidesa__ rage had slain; 
Of twelve bold brothers, I alone remain! 
Oppressa__d, we arma__d; and now this conquest gaina__d, 
My sire three hundred chosen sheep obtaina__d. 
(That large reprisal he might justly claim, 
For prize defrauded, and insulted fame, 
When Elisa__ monarch, at the public course, 
Detaina__d his chariot, and victorious horse.) 
The rest the people shared; myself surveya__d 
The just partition, and due victims paid. 
Three days were past, when Elis rose to war, 
With many a courser, and with many a car; 
The sons of Actor at their armya__s head 
(Young as they were) the vengeful squadrons led. 
High on the rock fair Thryoessa stands, 
Our utmost frontier on the Pylian lands: 
Not far the streams of famed Alphaeus flow: 
The stream they passa__d, and pitcha__d their tents below. 
Pallas, descending in the shades of night, 
Alarms the Pylians and commands the fight. 
Each burns for fame, and swells with martial pride, 
Myself the foremost; but my sire denied; 
Feara__d for my youth, exposed to stern alarms; 
And stoppa__d my chariot, and detaina__d my arms. 
My sire denied in vain: on foot I fled 
Amidst our chariots; for the goddess led. 
a_oeAlong fair Arenea__s delightful plain 
Soft Minyas rolls his waters to the main: 
There, horse and foot, the Pylian troops unite, 
And sheathed in arms, expect the dawning light. 
Thence, ere the sun advanced his noon-day flame, 
To great Alphaeusa__ sacred source we came. 
There first to Jove our solemn rites were paid; 
An untamed heifer pleased the blue-eyed maid; 
A bull, Alphaeus; and a bull was slain 
To the blue monarch of the watery main. 
In arms we slept, beside the winding flood, 
While round the town the fierce Epeians stood. 
Soon as the sun, with all-revealing ray, 
Flamed in the front of Heaven, and gave the day. 
[pg 214] 
Bright scenes of arms, and works of war appear; 
The nations meet; there Pylos, Elis here. 
The first who fell, beneath my javelin bled; 
King Augiasa__ son, and spouse of Agamede: 
(She that all simplesa__ healing virtues knew, 
And every herb that drinks the morning dew:) 
I seized his car, the van of battle led; 
The Epeians saw, they trembled, and they fled. 
The foe dispersed, their bravest warrior killa__d, 
Fierce as the whirlwind now I swept the field: 
Full fifty captive chariots graced my train; 
Two chiefs from each fell breathless to the plain. 
Then Actora__s sons had died, but Neptune shrouds 
The youthful heroes in a veil of clouds. 
Oa__er heapy shields, and oa__er the prostrate throng, 
Collecting spoils, and slaughtering all along, 
Through wide Buprasian fields we forced the foes, 
Where oa__er the vales the Olenian rocks arose; 
Till Pallas stoppa__d us where Alisium flows. 
Even there the hindmost of the rear I slay, 
And the same arm that led concludes the day; 
Then back to Pyle triumphant take my way. 
There to high Jove were public thanks assigna__d, 
As first of gods; to Nestor, of mankind. 
Such then I was, impella__d by youthful blood; 
So proved my valour for my countrya__s good. 
a_oeAchilles with unactive fury glows, 
And gives to passion what to Greece he owes. 
How shall he grieve, when to the eternal shade 
Her hosts shall sink, nor his the power to aid! 
0 friend! my memory recalls the day, 
When, gathering aids along the Grecian sea, 
I, and Ulysses, toucha__d at Phthiaa__s port, 
And entered Peleusa__ hospitable court. 
A bull to Jove he slew in sacrifice, 
And poura__d libations on the flaming thighs. 
Thyself, Achilles, and thy reverend sire 
Menoetius, turna__d the fragments on the fire. 
Achilles sees us, to the feast invites; 
Social we sit, and share the genial rites. 
We then explained the cause on which we came, 
Urged you to arms, and found you fierce for fame. 
Your ancient fathers generous precepts gave; 
Peleus said only this:a_"a__My son! be brave.a__ 
Menoetius thus: a__Though great Achilles shine 
In strength superior, and of race divine, 
Yet cooler thoughts thy elder years attend; 
Let thy just counsels aid, and rule thy friend.a__ 
Thus spoke your father at Thessaliaa__s court: 
Words now forgot, though now of vast import. 
[pg 215] 
Ah! try the utmost that a friend can say: 
Such gentle force the fiercest minds obey; 
Some favouring god Achillesa__ heart may move; 
Though deaf to glory, he may yield to love. 
If some dire oracle his breast alarm, 
If aught from Heaven withhold his saving arm, 
Some beam of comfort yet on Greece may shine, 
If thou but lead the Myrmidonian line; 
Clad in Achillesa__ arms, if thou appear, 
Proud Troy may tremble, and desist from war; 
Pressa__d by fresh forces, her oa__er-laboura__d train 
Shall seek their walls, and Greece respire again.a__ 
This toucha__d his generous heart, and from the tent 
Along the shore with hasty strides he went; 
Soon as he came, where, on the crowded strand, 
The public mart and courts of justice stand, 
Where the tall fleet of great Ulysses lies, 
And altars to the guardian gods arise; 
There, sad, he met the brave Euaemona__s son, 
Large painful drops from all his members run; 
An arrowa__s head yet rooted in his wound, 
The sable blood in circles marka__d the ground. 
As faintly reeling he confessa__d the smart, 
Weak was his pace, but dauntless was his heart. 
Divine compassion toucha__d Patroclusa__ breast, 
Who, sighing, thus his bleeding friend addressa__d: 
a_oeAh, hapless leaders of the Grecian host! 
Thus must ye perish on a barbarous coast? 
Is this your fate, to glut the dogs with gore, 
Far from your friends, and from your native shore? 
Say, great Eurypylus! shall Greece yet stand? 
Resists she yet the raging Hectora__s hand? 
Or are her heroes dooma__d to die with shame, 
And this the period of our wars and fame?a__ 
Eurypylus replies: a_oeNo more, my friend; 
Greece is no more! this day her glories end; 
Even to the ships victorious Troy pursues, 
Her force increasing as her toil renews. 
Those chiefs, that used her utmost rage to meet, 
Lie pierced with wounds, and bleeding in the fleet. 
But, thou, Patroclus! act a friendly part, 
Lead to my ships, and draw this deadly dart; 
With lukewarm water wash the gore away; 
With healing balms the raging smart allay, 
Such as sage Chiron, sire of pharmacy, 
Once taught Achilles, and Achilles thee. 
Of two famed surgeons, Podalirius stands 
This hour surrounded by the Trojan bands; 
And great Machaon, wounded in his tent, 
Now wants that succour which so oft he lent.a__ 
[pg 216] 
To him the chief: a_oeWhat then remains to do? 
The event of things the gods alone can view. 
Charged by Achillesa__ great command I fly, 
And bear with haste the Pylian kinga__s reply: 
But thy distress this instant claims relief.a__ 
He said, and in his arms upheld the chief. 
The slaves their mastera__s slow approach surveya__d, 
And hides of oxen on the floor displaya__d: 
There stretcha__d at length the wounded hero lay; 
Patroclus cut the forky steel away: 
Then in his hands a bitter root he bruised; 
The wound he washa__d, the styptic juice infused. 
The closing flesh that instant ceased to glow, 
The wound to torture, and the blood to flow. 
Illustration: HERCULES. 
HERCULES. 
[pg 217] 
BOOK XII. 
ARGUMENT. 
THE BATTLE AT THE GRECIAN WALL. 
The Greeks having retired into their intrenchments, Hector attempts to 
force them; but it proving impossible to pass the ditch, Polydamas 
advises to quit their chariots, and manage the attack on foot. The 
Trojans follow his counsel; and having divided their army into five 
bodies of foot, begin the assault. But upon the signal of an eagle with 
a serpent in his talons, which appeared on the left hand of the 
Trojans, Polydamas endeavours to withdraw them again. This Hector 
opposes, and continues the attack; in which, after many actions, 
Sarpedon makes the first breach in the wall. Hector also, casting a 
stone of vast size, forces open one of the gates, and enters at the 
head of his troops, who victoriously pursue the Grecians even to their 
ships. 
While thus the heroa__s pious cares attend 
The cure and safety of his wounded friend, 
Trojans and Greeks with clashing shields engage, 
And mutual deaths are dealt with mutual rage. 
Nor long the trench or lofty walls oppose; 
With gods averse the ill-fated works arose; 
Their powers neglected, and no victim slain, 
The walls were raised, the trenches sunk in vain. 
Without the gods, how short a period stands 
The proudest monument of mortal hands! 
This stood while Hector and Achilles raged. 
While sacred Troy the warring hosts engaged; 
But when her sons were slain, her city burna__d, 
And what survived of Greece to Greece returna__d; 
Then Neptune and Apollo shook the shore, 
Then Idaa__s summits poura__d their watery store; 
Rhesus and Rhodius then unite their rills, 
Caresus roaring down the stony hills, 
A_sepus, Granicus, with mingled force, 
And Xanthus foaming from his fruitful source; 
And gulfy Simois, rolling to the main224 
[pg 218] 
Helmets, and shields, and godlike heroes slain: 
These, turna__d by Phoebus from their wonted ways, 
Deluged the rampire nine continual days; 
The weight of waters saps the yielding wall, 
And to the sea the floating bulwarks fall. 
Incessant cataracts the Thunderer pours, 
And half the skies descend in sluicy showers. 
The god of ocean, marching stern before, 
With his huge trident wounds the trembling shore, 
Vast stones and piles from their foundation heaves, 
And whelms the smoky ruin in the waves. 
Now smootha__d with sand, and levella__d by the flood, 
No fragment tells where once the wonder stood; 
In their old bounds the rivers roll again, 
Shine a__twixt the hills, or wander oa__er the plain.225 
But this the gods in later times perform; 
As yet the bulwark stood, and braved the storm; 
The strokes yet echoed of contending powers; 
War thundera__d at the gates, and blood distaina__d the towers. 
Smote by the arm of Jove with dire dismay, 
Close by their hollow ships the Grecians lay: 
Hectora__s approach in every wind they hear, 
And Hectora__s fury every moment fear. 
He, like a whirlwind, tossa__d the scattering throng, 
Mingled the troops, and drove the field along. 
So a__midst the dogs and huntersa__ daring bands, 
Fierce of his might, a boar or lion stands; 
Arma__d foes around a dreadful circle form, 
And hissing javelins rain an iron storm: 
His powers untamed, their bold assault defy, 
And where he turns the rout disperse or die: 
He foams, he glares, he bounds against them all, 
And if he falls, his courage makes him fall. 
With equal rage encompassa__d Hector glows; 
Exhorts his armies, and the trenches shows. 
The panting steeds impatient fury breathe, 
And snort and tremble at the gulf beneath; 
Just at the brink they neigh, and paw the ground, 
And the turf trembles, and the skies resound. 
Eager they viewa__d the prospect dark and deep, 
Vast was the leap, and headlong hung the steep; 
The bottom bare, (a formidable show!) 
And bristled thick with sharpena__d stakes below. 
The foot alone this strong defence could force, 
And try the pass impervious to the horse. 
[pg 219] 
This saw Polydamas; who, wisely brave, 
Restraina__d great Hector, and this counsel gave: 
a_oeO thou, bold leader of the Trojan bands! 
And you, confederate chiefs from foreign lands! 
What entrance here can cumbrous chariots find, 
The stakes beneath, the Grecian walls behind? 
No pass through those, without a thousand wounds, 
No space for combat in yon narrow bounds. 
Proud of the favours mighty Jove has shown, 
On certain dangers we too rashly run: 
If a__tis will our haughty foes to tame, 
Oh may this instant end the Grecian name! 
Here, far from Argos, let their heroes fall, 
And one great day destroy and bury all! 
But should they turn, and here oppress our train, 
What hopes, what methods of retreat remain? 
Wedged in the trench, by our own troops confused, 
In one promiscuous carnage crusha__d and bruised, 
All Troy must perish, if their arms prevail, 
Nor shall a Trojan live to tell the tale. 
Hear then, ye warriors! and obey with speed; 
Back from the trenches let your steeds be led; 
Then all alighting, wedged in firm array, 
Proceed on foot, and Hector lead the way. 
So Greece shall stoop before our conquering power, 
And this (if Jove consent) her fatal hour.a__ 
Illustration: POLYDAMAS ADVISING HECTOR. 
POLYDAMAS ADVISING HECTOR. 
This counsel pleased: the godlike Hector sprung 
Swift from his seat; his clanging armour rung. 
The chiefa__s example followa__d by his train, 
Each quits his car, and issues on the plain, 
By orders strict the charioteers enjoina__d 
Compel the coursers to their ranks behind. 
[pg 220] 
The forces part in five distinguisha__d bands, 
And all obey their several chiefsa__ commands. 
The best and bravest in the first conspire, 
Pant for the fight, and threat the fleet with fire: 
Great Hector glorious in the van of these, 
Polydamas, and brave Cebriones. 
Before the next the graceful Paris shines, 
And bold Alcathous, and Agenor joins. 
The sons of Priam with the third appear, 
Deiphobus, and Helenas the seer; 
In arms with these the mighty Asius stood, 
Who drew from Hyrtacus his noble blood, 
And whom Arisbaa__s yellow coursers bore, 
The coursers fed on Sellea__s winding shore. 
Antenora__s sons the fourth battalion guide, 
And great A_neas, born on fountful Ide. 
Divine Sarpedon the last band obeya__d, 
Whom Glaucus and Asteropaeus aid. 
Next him, the bravest, at their armya__s head, 
But he more brave than all the hosts he led. 
Now with compacted shields in close array, 
The moving legions speed their headlong way: 
Already in their hopes they fire the fleet, 
And see the Grecians gasping at their feet. 
While every Trojan thus, and every aid, 
The advice of wise Polydamas obeya__d, 
Asius alone, confiding in his car, 
His vaunted coursers urged to meet the war. 
Unhappy hero! and advised in vain; 
Those wheels returning nea__er shall mark the plain; 
No more those coursers with triumphant joy 
Restore their master to the gates of Troy! 
Black death attends behind the Grecian wall, 
And great Idomeneus shall boast thy fall! 
Fierce to the left he drives, where from the plain 
The flying Grecians strove their ships to gain; 
Swift through the wall their horse and chariots passa__d, 
The gates half-opena__d to receive the last. 
Thither, exulting in his force, he flies: 
His following host with clamours rend the skies: 
To plunge the Grecians headlong in the main, 
Such their proud hopes; but all their hopes were vain! 
To guard the gates, two mighty chiefs attend, 
Who from the Lapithsa__ warlike race descend; 
This Polypoetes, great Perithousa__ heir, 
And that Leonteus, like the god of war. 
As two tall oaks, before the wall they rise; 
Their roots in earth, their heads amidst the skies: 
Whose spreading arms with leafy honours crowna__d, 
Forbid the tempest, and protect the ground; 
[pg 221] 
High on the hills appears their stately form, 
And their deep roots for ever brave the storm. 
So graceful these, and so the shock they stand 
Of raging Asius, and his furious band. 
Orestes, Acamas, in front appear, 
And OEnomaus and Thoon close the rear: 
In vain their clamours shake the ambient fields, 
In vain around them beat their hollow shields; 
The fearless brothers on the Grecians call, 
To guard their navies, and defend the wall. 
Even when they saw Troya__s sable troops impend, 
And Greece tumultuous from her towers descend, 
Forth from the portals rusha__d the intrepid pair, 
Opposed their breasts, and stood themselves the war. 
So two wild boars spring furious from their den, 
Roused with the cries of dogs and voice of men; 
On every side the crackling trees they tear, 
And root the shrubs, and lay the forest bare; 
They gnash their tusks, with fire their eye-balls roll, 
Till some wide wound lets out their mighty soul. 
Around their heads the whistling javelins sung, 
With sounding strokes their brazen targets rung; 
Fierce was the fight, while yet the Grecian powers 
Maintaina__d the walls, and manna__d the lofty towers: 
To save their fleet their last efforts they try, 
And stones and darts in mingled tempests fly. 
As when sharp Boreas blows abroad, and brings 
The dreary winter on his frozen wings; 
Beneath the low-hung clouds the sheets of snow 
Descend, and whiten all the fields below: 
So fast the darts on either army pour, 
So down the rampires rolls the rocky shower: 
Heavy, and thick, resound the battera__d shields, 
And the deaf echo rattles round the fields. 
With shame repulsed, with grief and fury driven, 
The frantic Asius thus accuses Heaven: 
a_oeIn powers immortal who shall now believe? 
Can those too flatter, and can Jove deceive? 
What man could doubt but Troya__s victorious power 
Should humble Greece, and this her fatal hour? 
But like when wasps from hollow crannies drive, 
To guard the entrance of their common hive, 
Darkening the rock, while with unwearied wings 
They strike the assailants, and infix their stings; 
A race determined, that to death contend: 
So fierce these Greeks their last retreats defend. 
Gods! shall two warriors only guard their gates, 
Repel an army, and defraud the fates?a__ 
These empty accents mingled with the wind, 
Nor moved great Jovea__s unalterable mind; 
[pg 222] 
To godlike Hector and his matchless might 
Was owed the glory of the destined fight. 
Like deeds of arms through all the forts were tried, 
And all the gates sustaina__d an equal tide; 
Through the long walls the stony showers were heard, 
The blaze of flames, the flash of arms appeara__d. 
The spirit of a god my breast inspire, 
To raise each act to life, and sing with fire! 
While Greece unconquera__d kept alive the war, 
Secure of death, confiding in despair; 
And all her guardian gods, in deep dismay, 
With unassisting arms deplored the day. 
Even yet the dauntless Lapithae maintain 
The dreadful pass, and round them heap the slain. 
First Damasus, by Polypoetesa__ steel, 
Pierced through his helmeta__s brazen visor, fell; 
The weapon drank the mingled brains and gore! 
The warrior sinks, tremendous now no more! 
Next Ormenus and Pylon yield their breath: 
Nor less Leonteus strews the field with death; 
First through the belt Hippomachus he gored, 
Then sudden waved his unresisted sword: 
Antiphates, as through the ranks he broke, 
The falchion struck, and fate pursued the stroke: 
Iamenus, Orestes, Menon, bled; 
And round him rose a monument of dead. 
Meantime, the bravest of the Trojan crew, 
Bold Hector and Polydamas, pursue; 
Fierce with impatience on the works to fall, 
And wrap in rolling flames the fleet and wall. 
These on the farther bank now stood and gazed, 
By Heaven alarma__d, by prodigies amazed: 
A signal omen stoppa__d the passing host, 
Their martial fury in their wonder lost. 
Jovea__s bird on sounding pinions beat the skies; 
A bleeding serpent of enormous size, 
His talons trussa__d; alive, and curling round, 
He stung the bird, whose throat received the wound: 
Mad with the smart, he drops the fatal prey, 
In airy circles wings his painful way, 
Floats on the winds, and rends the heaven with cries: 
Amidst the host the fallen serpent lies. 
They, pale with terror, mark its spires unrolla__d, 
And Jovea__s portent with beating hearts behold. 
Then first Polydamas the silence broke, 
Long weigha__d the signal, and to Hector spoke: 
a_oeHow oft, my brother, thy reproach I bear, 
For words well meant, and sentiments sincere? 
True to those counsels which I judge the best, 
I tell the faithful dictates of my breast. 
[pg 223] 
To speak his thoughts is every freemana__s right, 
In peace, in war, in council, and in fight; 
And all I move, deferring to thy sway, 
But tends to raise that power which I obey. 
Then hear my words, nor may my words be vain! 
Seek not this day the Grecian ships to gain; 
For sure, to warn us, Jove his omen sent, 
And thus my mind explains its clear event: 
The victor eagle, whose sinister flight 
Retards our host, and fills our hearts with fright, 
Dismissa__d his conquest in the middle skies, 
Allowa__d to seize, but not possess the prize; 
Thus, though we gird with fires the Grecian fleet, 
Though these proud bulwalks tumble at our feet, 
Toils unforeseen, and fiercer, are decreed; 
More woes shall follow, and more heroes bleed. 
So bodes my soul, and bids me thus advise; 
For thus a skilful seer would read the skies.a__ 
To him then Hector with disdain returna__d: 
(Fierce as he spoke, his eyes with fury burna__d:) 
a_oeAre these the faithful counsels of thy tongue? 
Thy will is partial, not thy reason wrong: 
Or if the purpose of thy heart thou vent, 
Sure heaven resumes the little sense it lent. 
What coward counsels would thy madness move 
Against the word, the will reveala__d of Jove? 
The leading sign, the irrevocable nod, 
And happy thunders of the favouring god, 
These shall I slight, and guide my wavering mind 
By wandering birds that flit with every wind? 
Ye vagrants of the sky! your wings extend, 
Or where the suns arise, or where descend; 
To right, to left, unheeded take your way, 
While I the dictates of high heaven obey. 
Without a sign his sword the brave man draws, 
And asks no omen but his countrya__s cause. 
But why shoulda__st thou suspect the wara__s success? 
None fears it more, as none promotes it less: 
Though all our chiefs amidst yon ships expire, 
Trust thy own cowardice to escape their fire. 
Troy and her sons may find a general grave, 
But thou canst live, for thou canst be a slave. 
Yet should the fears that wary mind suggests 
Spread their cold poison through our soldiersa__ breasts, 
My javelin can revenge so base a part, 
And free the soul that quivers in thy heart.a__ 
Furious he spoke, and, rushing to the wall, 
Calls on his host; his host obey the call; 
With ardour follow where their leader flies: 
Redoubling clamours thunder in the skies. 
[pg 224] 
Jove breathes a whirlwind from the hills of Ide, 
And drifts of dust the clouded navy hide; 
He fills the Greeks with terror and dismay, 
And gives great Hector the predestined day. 
Strong in themselves, but stronger in his aid, 
Close to the works their rigid siege they laid. 
In vain the mounds and massy beams defend, 
While these they undermine, and those they rend; 
Upheaved the piles that prop the solid wall; 
And heaps on heaps the smoky ruins fall. 
Greece on her ramparts stands the fierce alarms; 
The crowded bulwarks blaze with waving arms, 
Shield touching shield, a long refulgent row; 
Whence hissing darts, incessant, rain below. 
The bold Ajaces fly from tower to tower, 
And rouse, with flame divine, the Grecian power. 
The generous impulse every Greek obeys; 
Threats urge the fearful; and the valiant, praise. 
a_oeFellows in arms! whose deeds are known to fame, 
And you, whose ardour hopes an equal name! 
Since not alike endued with force or art; 
Behold a day when each may act his part! 
A day to fire the brave, and warm the cold, 
To gain new glories, or augment the old. 
Urge those who stand, and those who faint, excite; 
Drown Hectora__s vaunts in loud exhorts of fight; 
Conquest, not safety, fill the thoughts of all; 
Seek not your fleet, but sally from the wall; 
So Jove once more may drive their routed train, 
And Troy lie trembling in her walls again.a__ 
Their ardour kindles all the Grecian powers; 
And now the stones descend in heavier showers. 
As when high Jove his sharp artillery forms, 
And opes his cloudy magazine of storms; 
In wintera__s bleak un comfortable reign, 
A snowy inundation hides the plain; 
He stills the winds, and bids the skies to sleep; 
Then pours the silent tempest thick and deep; 
And first the mountain-tops are covera__d oa__er, 
Then the green fields, and then the sandy shore; 
Bent with the weight, the nodding woods are seen, 
And one bright waste hides all the works of men: 
The circling seas, alone absorbing all, 
Drink the dissolving fleeces as they fall: 
So from each side increased the stony rain, 
And the white ruin rises oa__er the plain. 
Thus godlike Hector and his troops contend 
To force the ramparts, and the gates to rend: 
Nor Troy could conquer, nor the Greeks would yield, 
Till great Sarpedon towera__d amid the field; 
[pg 225] 
For mighty Jove inspired with martial flame 
His matchless son, and urged him on to fame. 
In arms he shines, conspicuous from afar, 
And bears aloft his ample shield in air; 
Within whose orb the thick bull-hides were rolla__d, 
Ponderous with brass, and bound with ductile gold: 
And while two pointed javelins arm his hands, 
Majestic moves along, and leads his Lycian bands. 
So pressa__d with hunger, from the mountaina__s brow 
Descends a lion on the flocks below; 
So stalks the lordly savage oa__er the plain, 
In sullen majesty, and stern disdain: 
In vain loud mastiffs bay him from afar, 
And shepherds gall him with an iron war; 
Regardless, furious, he pursues his way; 
He foams, he roars, he rends the panting prey. 
Resolved alike, divine Sarpedon glows 
With generous rage that drives him on the foes. 
He views the towers, and meditates their fall, 
To sure destruction dooms the aspiring wall; 
Then casting on his friend an ardent look, 
Fired with the thirst of glory, thus he spoke: 
a_oeWhy boast we, Glaucus! our extended reign,226 
Where Xanthusa__ streams enrich the Lycian plain, 
Our numerous herds that range the fruitful field, 
And hills where vines their purple harvest yield, 
Our foaming bowls with purer nectar crowna__d, 
Our feasts enhanced with musica__s sprightly sound? 
Why on those shores are we with joy surveya__d, 
Admired as heroes, and as gods obeya__d, 
Unless great acts superior merit prove, 
And vindicate the bounteous powers above? 
a__Tis ours, the dignity they give to grace; 
The first in valour, as the first in place; 
That when with wondering eyes our martial bands 
Behold our deeds transcending our commands, 
Such, they may cry, deserve the sovereign state, 
Whom those that envy dare not imitate! 
Could all our care elude the gloomy grave, 
Which claims no less the fearful and the brave, 
For lust of fame I should not vainly dare 
In fighting fields, nor urge thy soul to war. 
But since, alas! ignoble age must come, 
[pg 226] 
Disease, and deatha__s inexorable doom 
The life, which others pay, let us bestow, 
And give to fame what we to nature owe; 
Brave though we fall, and honoura__d if we live, 
Or let us glory gain, or glory give!a__ 
He said; his words the listening chief inspire 
With equal warmth, and rouse the warriora__s fire; 
The troops pursue their leaders with delight, 
Rush to the foe, and claim the promised fight. 
Menestheus from on high the storm beheld 
Threatening the fort, and blackening in the field: 
Around the walls he gazed, to view from far 
What aid appeara__d to avert the approaching war, 
And saw where Teucer with the Ajaces stood, 
Of fight insatiate, prodigal of blood. 
In vain he calls; the din of helms and shields 
Rings to the skies, and echoes through the fields, 
The brazen hinges fly, the walls resound, 
Heaven trembles, roar the mountains, thunders all the ground 
Then thus to Thoos: a_oeHence with speed (he said), 
And urge the bold Ajaces to our aid; 
Their strength, united, best may help to bear 
The bloody labours of the doubtful war: 
Hither the Lycian princes bend their course, 
The best and bravest of the hostile force. 
But if too fiercely there the foes contend, 
Let Telamon, at least, our towers defend, 
And Teucer haste with his unerring bow 
To share the danger, and repel the foe.a__ 
Swift, at the word, the herald speeds along 
The lofty ramparts, through the martial throng, 
And finds the heroes bathed in sweat and gore, 
Opposed in combat on the dusty shore. 
a_oeYe valiant leaders of our warlike bands! 
Your aid (said Thoos) Peteusa__ son demands; 
Your strength, united, best may help to bear 
The bloody labours of the doubtful war: 
Thither the Lycian princes bend their course, 
The best and bravest of the hostile force. 
But if too fiercely, here, the foes contend, 
At least, let Telamon those towers defend, 
And Teucer haste with his unerring bow 
To share the danger, and repel the foe.a__ 
Straight to the fort great Ajax turna__d his care, 
And thus bespoke his brothers of the war: 
a_oeNow, valiant Lycomede! exert your might, 
And, brave Oileus, prove your force in fight; 
To you I trust the fortune of the field, 
Till by this arm the foe shall be repella__d: 
That done, expect me to complete the day 
[pg 227] 
Then with his sevenfold shield he strode away. 
With equal steps bold Teucer pressa__d the shore, 
Whose fatal bow the strong Pandion bore. 
High on the walls appeara__d the Lycian powers, 
Like some black tempest gathering round the towers: 
The Greeks, oppressa__d, their utmost force unite, 
Prepared to labour in the unequal fight: 
The war renews, mixa__d shouts and groans arise; 
Tumultuous clamour mounts, and thickens in the skies. 
Fierce Ajax first the advancing host invades, 
And sends the brave Epicles to the shades, 
Sarpedona__s friend. Across the warriora__s way, 
Rent from the walls, a rocky fragment lay; 
In modern ages not the strongest swain 
Could heave the unwieldy burden from the plain: 
He poised, and swung it round; then tossa__d on high, 
It flew with force, and laboura__d up the sky; 
Full on the Lyciana__s helmet thundering down, 
The ponderous ruin crusha__d his battera__d crown. 
As skilful divers from some airy steep 
Headlong descend, and shoot into the deep, 
So falls Epicles; then in groans expires, 
And murmuring to the shades the soul retires. 
While to the ramparts daring Glaucus drew, 
From Teucera__s hand a winged arrow flew; 
The bearded shaft the destined passage found, 
And on his naked arm inflicts a wound. 
The chief, who feara__d some foea__s insulting boast 
Might stop the progress of his warlike host, 
Conceala__d the wound, and, leaping from his height 
Retired reluctant from the unfinisha__d fight. 
Divine Sarpedon with regret beheld 
Disabled Glaucus slowly quit the field; 
His beating breast with generous ardour glows, 
He springs to fight, and flies upon the foes. 
Alcmaon first was dooma__d his force to feel; 
Deep in his breast he plunged the pointed steel; 
Then from the yawning wound with fury tore 
The spear, pursued by gushing streams of gore: 
Down sinks the warrior with a thundering sound, 
His brazen armour rings against the ground. 
Swift to the battlement the victor flies, 
Tugs with full force, and every nerve applies: 
It shakes; the ponderous stones disjointed yield; 
The rolling ruins smoke along the field. 
A mighty breach appears; the walls lie bare; 
And, like a deluge, rushes in the war. 
At once bold Teucer draws the twanging bow, 
And Ajax sends his javelin at the foe; 
Fixa__d in his belt the feathera__d weapon stood, 
[pg 228] 
And through his buckler drove the trembling wood; 
But Jove was present in the dire debate, 
To shield his offspring, and avert his fate. 
The prince gave back, not meditating flight, 
But urging vengeance, and severer fight; 
Then raised with hope, and fired with glorya__s charms, 
His fainting squadrons to new fury warms. 
a_oeO where, ye Lycians, is the strength you boast? 
Your former fame and ancient virtue lost! 
The breach lies open, but your chief in vain 
Attempts alone the guarded pass to gain: 
Unite, and soon that hostile fleet shall fall: 
The force of powerful union conquers all.a__ 
This just rebuke inflamed the Lycian crew; 
They join, they thicken, and the assault renew: 
Unmoved the embodied Greeks their fury dare, 
And fixa__d support the weight of all the war; 
Nor could the Greeks repel the Lycian powers, 
Nor the bold Lycians force the Grecian towers. 
As on the confines of adjoining grounds, 
Two stubborn swains with blows dispute their bounds; 
They tug, they sweat; but neither gain, nor yield, 
One foot, one inch, of the contended field; 
Thus obstinate to death, they fight, they fall; 
Nor these can keep, nor those can win the wall. 
Their manly breasts are pierced with many a wound, 
Loud strokes are heard, and rattling arms resound; 
The copious slaughter covers all the shore, 
And the high ramparts drip with human gore. 
As when two scales are charged with doubtful loads, 
From side to side the trembling balance nods, 
(While some laborious matron, just and poor, 
With nice exactness weighs her woolly store,) 
Till poised aloft, the resting beam suspends 
Each equal weight; nor this, nor that, descends:227 
So stood the war, till Hectora__s matchless might, 
With fates prevailing, turna__d the scale of fight. 
Fierce as a whirlwind up the walls he flies, 
And fires his host with loud repeated cries. 
a_oeAdvance, ye Trojans! lend your valiant hands, 
Haste to the fleet, and toss the blazing brands!a__ 
They hear, they run; and, gathering at his call, 
Raise scaling engines, and ascend the wall: 
Around the works a wood of glittering spears 
Shoots up, and all the rising host appears. 
A ponderous stone bold Hector heaved to throw, 
Pointed above, and rough and gross below: 
[pg 229] 
Not two strong men the enormous weight could raise, 
Such men as live in these degenerate days: 
Yet this, as easy as a swain could bear 
The snowy fleece, he tossa__d, and shook in air; 
For Jove upheld, and lightena__d of its load 
The unwieldy rock, the labour of a god. 
Thus arma__d, before the folded gates he came, 
Of massy substance, and stupendous frame; 
With iron bars and brazen hinges strong, 
On lofty beams of solid timber hung: 
Then thundering through the planks with forceful sway, 
Drives the sharp rock; the solid beams give way, 
The folds are shattera__d; from the crackling door 
Leap the resounding bars, the flying hinges roar. 
Now rushing in, the furious chief appears, 
Gloomy as night! and shakes two shining spears:228 
A dreadful gleam from his bright armour came, 
And from his eye-balls flasha__d the living flame. 
He moves a god, resistless in his course, 
And seems a match for more than mortal force. 
Then pouring after, through the gaping space, 
A tide of Trojans flows, and fills the place; 
The Greeks behold, they tremble, and they fly; 
The shore is heapa__d with death, and tumult rends the sky. 
Illustration: GREEK ALTAR. 
GREEK ALTAR. 
[pg 230] 
BOOK XIII. 
ARGUMENT. 
THE FOURTH BATTLE CONTINUED, IN WHICH NEPTUNE ASSISTS THE GREEKS: THE 
ACTS OF IDOMENEUS. 
Neptune, concerned for the loss of the Grecians, upon seeing the 
fortification forced by Hector, (who had entered the gate near the 
station of the Ajaces,) assumes the shape of Calchas, and inspires 
those heroes to oppose him: then, in the form of one of the generals, 
encourages the other Greeks who had retired to their vessels. The 
Ajaces form their troops in a close phalanx, and put a stop to Hector 
and the Trojans. Several deeds of valour are performed; Meriones, 
losing his spear in the encounter, repairs to seek another at the tent 
of Idomeneus: this occasions a conversation between those two warriors, 
who return together to the battle. Idomeneus signalizes his courage 
above the rest; he kills Othryoneus, Asius, and Alcathous: Deiphobus 
and A_neas march against him, and at length Idomeneus retires. Menelaus 
wounds Helenus, and kills Pisander. The Trojans are repulsed on the 
left wing; Hector still keeps his ground against the Ajaces, till, 
being galled by the Locrian slingers and archers, Polydamas advises to 
call a council of war: Hector approves of his advice, but goes first to 
rally the Trojans; upbraids Paris, rejoins Polydamas, meets Ajax again, 
and renews the attack. 
The eight-and-twentieth day still continues. The scene is between the 
Grecian wall and the sea-shore. 
When now the Thunderer on the sea-beat coast 
Had fixa__d great Hector and his conquering host, 
He left them to the fates, in bloody fray 
To toil and struggle through the well-fought day. 
Then turna__d to Thracia from the field of fight 
Those eyes that shed insufferable light, 
To where the Mysians prove their martial force, 
And hardy Thracians tame the savage horse; 
And where the far-famed Hippomolgian strays, 
Renowna__d for justice and for length of days;229 
[pg 231] 
Thrice happy race! that, innocent of blood, 
From milk, innoxious, seek their simple food: 
Jove sees delighted; and avoids the scene 
Of guilty Troy, of arms, and dying men: 
No aid, he deems, to either host is given, 
While his high law suspends the powers of Heaven. 
Meantime the monarch of the watery main 
Observed the Thunderer, nor observed in vain. 
In Samothracia, on a mountaina__s brow, 
Whose waving woods oa__erhung the deeps below, 
He sat; and round him cast his azure eyes 
Where Idaa__s misty tops confusedly rise; 
Below, fair Iliona__s glittering spires were seen; 
The crowded ships and sable seas between. 
There, from the crystal chambers of the main 
Emerged, he sat, and mourna__d his Argives slain. 
At Jove incensed, with grief and fury stung, 
Prone down the rocky steep he rusha__d along; 
Fierce as he passa__d, the lofty mountains nod, 
The forest shakes; earth trembled as he trod, 
And felt the footsteps of the immortal god. 
From realm to realm three ample strides he took, 
And, at the fourth, the distant A_gae shook. 
Far in the bay his shining palace stands, 
Eternal frame! not raised by mortal hands: 
This having reacha__d, his brass-hoofa__d steeds he reins, 
Fleet as the winds, and decka__d with golden manes. 
Refulgent arms his mighty limbs infold, 
Immortal arms of adamant and gold. 
He mounts the car, the golden scourge applies, 
He sits superior, and the chariot flies: 
His whirling wheels the glassy surface sweep; 
The enormous monsters rolling oa__er the deep 
Gambol around him on the watery way, 
And heavy whales in awkward measures play; 
The sea subsiding spreads a level plain, 
Exults, and owns the monarch of the main; 
The parting waves before his coursers fly; 
The wondering waters leave his axle dry. 
Deep in the liquid regions lies a cave, 
Between where Tenedos the surges lave, 
And rocky Imbrus breaks the rolling wave: 
There the great ruler of the azure round 
Stoppa__d his swift chariot, and his steeds unbound, 
Fed with ambrosial herbage from his hand, 
And linka__d their fetlocks with a golden band, 
Infrangible, immortal: there they stay: 
The father of the floods pursues his way: 
Where, like a tempest, darkening heaven around, 
Or fiery deluge that devours the ground, 
[pg 232] 
The impatient Trojans, in a gloomy throng, 
Embattled rolla__d, as Hector rusha__d along: 
To the loud tumult and the barbarous cry 
The heavens re-echo, and the shores reply: 
They vow destruction to the Grecian name, 
And in their hopes the fleets already flame. 
But Neptune, rising from the seas profound, 
The god whose earthquakes rock the solid ground, 
Now wears a mortal form; like Calchas seen, 
Such his loud voice, and such his manly mien; 
His shouts incessant every Greek inspire, 
But most the Ajaces, adding fire to fire. 
Illustration: NEPTUNE RISING FROM THE SEA. 
NEPTUNE RISING FROM THE SEA. 
a_oea__Tis yours, O warriors, all our hopes to raise: 
Oh recollect your ancient worth and praise! 
a__Tis yours to save us, if you cease to fear; 
Flight, more than shameful, is destructive here. 
On other works though Troy with fury fall, 
And pour her armies oa__er our battera__d wall: 
There Greece has strength: but this, this part oa__erthrown, 
Her strength were vain; I dread for you alone: 
Here Hector rages like the force of fire, 
Vaunts of his gods, and calls high Jove his sire: 
If yet some heavenly power your breast excite, 
Breathe in your hearts, and string your arms to fight, 
Greece yet may live, her threatena__d fleet maintain: 
And Hectora__s force, and Jovea__s own aid, be vain.a__ 
Then with his sceptre, that the deep controls, 
He toucha__d the chiefs, and steela__d their manly souls: 
Strength, not their own, the touch divine imparts, 
[pg 233] 
Prompts their light limbs, and swells their daring hearts. 
Then, as a falcon from the rocky height, 
Her quarry seen, impetuous at the sight, 
Forth-springing instant, darts herself from high, 
Shoots on the wing, and skims along the sky: 
Such, and so swift, the power of ocean flew; 
The wide horizon shut him from their view. 
The inspiring god Oileusa__ active son 
Perceived the first, and thus to Telamon: 
a_oeSome god, my friend, some god in human form 
Favouring descends, and wills to stand the storm. 
Not Calchas this, the venerable seer; 
Short as he turned, I saw the power appear: 
I marka__d his parting, and the steps he trod; 
His own bright evidence reveals a god. 
Even now some energy divine I share, 
And seem to walk on wings, and tread in air!a__ 
a_oeWith equal ardour (Telamon returns) 
My soul is kindled, and my bosom burns; 
New rising spirits all my force alarm, 
Lift each impatient limb, and brace my arm. 
This ready arm, unthinking, shakes the dart; 
The blood pours back, and fortifies my heart: 
Singly, methinks, yon towering chief I meet, 
And stretch the dreadful Hector at my feet.a__ 
Full of the god that urged their burning breast, 
The heroes thus their mutual warmth expressa__d. 
Neptune meanwhile the routed Greeks inspired; 
Who, breathless, pale, with length of labours tired, 
Pant in the ships; while Troy to conquest calls, 
And swarms victorious oa__er their yielding walls: 
Trembling before the impending storm they lie, 
While tears of rage stand burning in their eye. 
Greece sunk they thought, and this their fatal hour; 
But breathe new courage as they feel the power. 
Teucer and Leitus first his words excite; 
Then stern Peneleus rises to the fight; 
Thoas, Deipyrus, in arms renowna__d, 
And Merion next, the impulsive fury found; 
Last Nestora__s son the same bold ardour takes, 
While thus the god the martial fire awakes: 
a_oeOh lasting infamy, oh dire disgrace 
To chiefs of vigorous youth, and manly race! 
I trusted in the gods, and you, to see 
Brave Greece victorious, and her navy free: 
Ah, noa_"the glorious combat you disclaim, 
And one black day clouds all her former fame. 
Heavens! what a prodigy these eyes survey, 
Unseen, unthought, till this amazing day! 
Fly we at length from Troya__s oft-conquera__d bands? 
[pg 234] 
And falls our fleet by such inglorious hands? 
A rout undisciplined, a straggling train, 
Not born to glories of the dusty plain; 
Like frighted fawns from hill to hill pursued, 
A prey to every savage of the wood: 
Shall these, so late who trembled at your name, 
Invade your camps, involve your ships in flame? 
A change so shameful, say, what cause has wrought? 
The soldiersa__ baseness, or the generala__s fault? 
Fools! will ye perish for your leadera__s vice; 
The purchase infamy, and life the price? 
a__Tis not your cause, Achillesa__ injured fame: 
Anothera__s is the crime, but yours the shame. 
Grant that our chief offend through rage or lust, 
Must you be cowards, if your kinga__s unjust? 
Prevent this evil, and your country save: 
Small thought retrieves the spirits of the brave. 
Think, and subdue! on dastards dead to fame 
I waste no anger, for they feel no shame: 
But you, the pride, the flower of all our host, 
My heart weeps blood to see your glory lost! 
Nor deem this day, this battle, all you lose; 
A day more black, a fate more vile, ensues. 
Let each reflect, who prizes fame or breath, 
On endless infamy, on instant death: 
For, lo! the fated time, the appointed shore: 
Hark! the gates burst, the brazen barriers roar! 
Impetuous Hector thunders at the wall; 
The hour, the spot, to conquer, or to fall.a__ 
These words the Greciansa__ fainting hearts inspire, 
And listening armies catch the godlike fire. 
Fixa__d at his post was each bold Ajax found, 
With well-ranged squadrons strongly circled round: 
So close their order, so disposed their fight, 
As Pallasa__ self might view with fixa__d delight; 
Or had the god of war inclined his eyes, 
The god of war had owna__d a just surprise. 
A chosen phalanx, firm, resolved as fate, 
Descending Hector and his battle wait. 
An iron scene gleams dreadful oa__er the fields, 
Armour in armour locka__d, and shields in shields, 
Spears lean on spears, on targets targets throng, 
Helms stuck to helms, and man drove man along. 
The floating plumes unnumbera__d wave above, 
As when an earthquake stirs the nodding grove; 
And levella__d at the skies with pointing rays, 
Their brandisha__d lances at each motion blaze. 
Thus breathing death, in terrible array, 
The close compacted legions urged their way: 
Fierce they drove on, impatient to destroy; 
[pg 235] 
Troy charged the first, and Hector first of Troy. 
As from some mountaina__s craggy forehead torn, 
A rocka__s round fragment flies, with fury borne, 
(Which from the stubborn stone a torrent rends,) 
Precipitate the ponderous mass descends: 
From steep to steep the rolling ruin bounds; 
At every shock the crackling wood resounds; 
Still gathering force, it smokes; and urged amain, 
Whirls, leaps, and thunders down, impetuous to the plain: 
There stopsa_"so Hector. Their whole force he proved,230 
Resistless when he raged, and, when he stoppa__d, unmoved. 
On him the war is bent, the darts are shed, 
And all their falchions wave around his head: 
Repulsed he stands, nor from his stand retires; 
But with repeated shouts his army fires. 
a_oeTrojans! be firm; this arm shall make your way 
Through yon square body, and that black array: 
Stand, and my spear shall rout their scattering power, 
Strong as they seem, embattled like a tower; 
For he that Junoa__s heavenly bosom warms, 
The first of gods, this day inspires our arms.a__ 
He said; and roused the soul in every breast: 
Urged with desire of fame, beyond the rest, 
Forth marcha__d Deiphobus; but, marching, held 
Before his wary steps his ample shield. 
Bold Merion aima__d a stroke (nor aima__d it wide); 
The glittering javelin pierced the tough bull-hide; 
But pierced not through: unfaithful to his hand, 
The point broke short, and sparkled in the sand. 
The Trojan warrior, toucha__d with timely fear, 
On the raised orb to distance bore the spear. 
The Greek, retreating, mourna__d his frustrate blow, 
And cursed the treacherous lance that spared a foe; 
Then to the ships with surly speed he went, 
To seek a surer javelin in his tent. 
Meanwhile with rising rage the battle glows, 
The tumult thickens, and the clamour grows. 
By Teucera__s arm the warlike Imbrius bleeds, 
The son of Mentor, rich in generous steeds. 
Ere yet to Troy the sons of Greece were led, 
In fair Pedaeusa__ verdant pastures bred, 
The youth had dwelt, remote from wara__s alarms, 
And blest in bright Medesicastea__s arms: 
(This nymph, the fruit of Priama__s ravisha__d joy, 
[pg 236] 
Allied the warrior to the house of Troy:) 
To Troy, when glory calla__d his arms, he came, 
And matcha__d the bravest of her chiefs in fame: 
With Priama__s sons, a guardian of the throne, 
He lived, beloved and honoura__d as his own. 
Him Teucer pierced between the throat and ear: 
He groans beneath the Telamonian spear. 
As from some far-seen mountaina__s airy crown, 
Subdued by steel, a tall ash tumbles down, 
And soils its verdant tresses on the ground; 
So falls the youth; his arms the fall resound. 
Then Teucer rushing to despoil the dead, 
From Hectora__s hand a shining javelin fled: 
He saw, and shunna__d the death; the forceful dart 
Sung on, and pierced Amphimachusa__s heart, 
Cteatusa__ son, of Neptunea__s forceful line; 
Vain was his courage, and his race divine! 
Prostrate he falls; his clanging arms resound, 
And his broad buckler thunders on the ground. 
To seize his beamy helm the victor flies, 
And just had fastened on the dazzling prize, 
When Ajaxa__ manly arm a javelin flung; 
Full on the shielda__s round boss the weapon rung; 
He felt the shock, nor more was dooma__d to feel, 
Secure in mail, and sheatha__d in shining steel. 
Repulsed he yields; the victor Greeks obtain 
The spoils contested, and bear off the slain. 
Between the leaders of the Athenian line, 
(Stichius the brave, Menestheus the divine,) 
Deplored Amphimachus, sad object! lies; 
Imbrius remains the fierce Ajacesa__ prize. 
As two grim lions bear across the lawn, 
Snatcha__d from devouring hounds, a slaughtera__d fawn. 
In their fell jaws high-lifting through the wood, 
And sprinkling all the shrubs with drops of blood; 
So these, the chief: great Ajax from the dead 
Strips his bright arms; Oileus lops his head: 
Tossa__d like a ball, and whirla__d in air away, 
At Hectora__s feet the gory visage lay. 
The god of ocean, fired with stern disdain, 
And pierced with sorrow for his grandson slain, 
Inspires the Grecian hearts, confirms their hands, 
And breathes destruction on the Trojan bands. 
Swift as a whirlwind rushing to the fleet, 
He finds the lance-famed Idomen of Crete, 
His pensive brow the generous care expressa__d 
With which a wounded soldier toucha__d his breast, 
Whom in the chance of war a javelin tore, 
And his sad comrades from the battle bore; 
Him to the surgeons of the camp he sent: 
[pg 237] 
That office paid, he issued from his tent 
Fierce for the fight: to whom the god begun, 
In Thoasa__ voice, Andraemona__s valiant son, 
Who ruled where Calydona__s white rocks arise, 
And Pleurona__s chalky cliffs emblaze the skies: 
a_oeWherea__s now the imperious vaunt, the daring boast, 
Of Greece victorious, and proud Ilion lost?a__ 
To whom the king: a_oeOn Greece no blame be thrown; 
Arms are her trade, and war is all her own. 
Her hardy heroes from the well-fought plains 
Nor fear withholds, nor shameful sloth detains: 
a__Tis heaven, alas! and Jovea__s all-powerful doom, 
That far, far distant from our native home 
Wills us to fall inglorious! Oh, my friend! 
Once foremost in the fight, still prone to lend 
Or arms or counsels, now perform thy best, 
And what thou canst not singly, urge the rest.a__ 
Thus he: and thus the god whose force can make 
The solid globea__s eternal basis shake: 
a_oeAh! never may he see his native land, 
But feed the vultures on this hateful strand, 
Who seeks ignobly in his ships to stay, 
Nor dares to combat on this signal day! 
For this, behold! in horrid arms I shine, 
And urge thy soul to rival acts with mine. 
Together let us battle on the plain; 
Two, not the worst; nor even this succour vain: 
Not vain the weakest, if their force unite; 
But ours, the bravest have confessa__d in fight.a__ 
This said, he rushes where the combat burns; 
Swift to his tent the Cretan king returns: 
From thence, two javelins glittering in his hand, 
And clad in arms that lightena__d all the strand, 
Fierce on the foe the impetuous hero drove, 
Like lightning bursting from the arm of Jove, 
Which to pale man the wrath of heaven declares, 
Or terrifies the offending world with wars; 
In streamy sparkles, kindling all the skies, 
From pole to pole the trail of glory flies: 
Thus his bright armour oa__er the dazzled throng 
Gleama__d dreadful, as the monarch flasha__d along. 
Him, near his tent, Meriones attends; 
Whom thus he questions: a_oeEver best of friends! 
O say, in every art of battle skilla__d, 
What holds thy courage from so brave a field? 
On some important message art thou bound, 
Or bleeds my friend by some unhappy wound? 
Inglorious here, my soul abhors to stay, 
And glows with prospects of tha__ approaching day.a__ 
a_oeO prince! (Meriones replies) whose care 
[pg 238] 
Leads forth the embattled sons of Crete to war; 
This speaks my grief: this headless lance I wield; 
The rest lies rooted in a Trojan shield.a__ 
To whom the Cretan: a_oeEnter, and receive 
The wonted weapons; those my tent can give; 
Spears I have store, (and Trojan lances all,) 
That shed a lustre round the illumined wall, 
Though I, disdainful of the distant war, 
Nor trust the dart, nor aim the uncertain spear, 
Yet hand to hand I fight, and spoil the slain; 
And thence these trophies, and these arms I gain. 
Enter, and see on heaps the helmets rolla__d, 
And high-hung spears, and shields that flame with gold.a__ 
a_oeNor vain (said Merion) are our martial toils; 
We too can boast of no ignoble spoils: 
But those my ship contains; whence distant far, 
I fight conspicuous in the van of war, 
What need I more? If any Greek there be 
Who knows not Merion, I appeal to thee.a__ 
To this, Idomeneus: a_oeThe fields of fight 
Have proved thy valour, and unconquera__d might: 
And were some ambush for the foes designa__d, 
Even there thy courage would not lag behind: 
In that sharp service, singled from the rest, 
The fear of each, or valour, stands confessa__d. 
No force, no firmness, the pale coward shows; 
He shifts his place: his colour comes and goes: 
A dropping sweat creeps cold on every part; 
Against his bosom beats his quivering heart; 
Terror and death in his wild eye-balls stare; 
With chattering teeth he stands, and stiffening hair, 
And looks a bloodless image of despair! 
Not so the bravea_"still dauntless, still the same, 
Unchanged his colour, and unmoved his frame: 
Composed his thought, determined is his eye, 
And fixa__d his soul, to conquer or to die: 
If aught disturb the tenour of his breast, 
a__Tis but the wish to strike before the rest. 
a_oeIn such assays thy blameless worth is known, 
And every art of dangerous war thy own. 
By chance of fight whatever wounds you bore, 
Those wounds were glorious all, and all before; 
Such as may teach, a__twas still thy brave delight 
Ta__oppose thy bosom where thy foremost fight. 
But why, like infants, cold to honoura__s charms, 
Stand we to talk, when glory calls to arms? 
Goa_"from my conquera__d spears the choicest take, 
And to their owners send them nobly back.a__ 
Swift at the word bold Merion snatcha__d a spear 
And, breathing slaughter, followa__d to the war. 
[pg 239] 
So Mars armipotent invades the plain, 
(The wide destroyer of the race of man,) 
Terror, his best-beloved son, attends his course, 
Arma__d with stern boldness, and enormous force; 
The pride of haughty warriors to confound, 
And lay the strength of tyrants on the ground: 
From Thrace they fly, calla__d to the dire alarms 
Of warring Phlegyans, and Ephyrian arms; 
Invoked by both, relentless they dispose, 
To these glad conquest, murderous rout to those. 
So marcha__d the leaders of the Cretan train, 
And their bright arms shot horror oa__er the plain. 
Then first spake Merion: a_oeShall we join the right, 
Or combat in the centre of the fight? 
Or to the left our wonted succour lend? 
Hazard and fame all parts alike attend.a__ 
a_oeNot in the centre (Idomen replied:) 
Our ablest chieftains the main battle guide; 
Each godlike Ajax makes that post his care, 
And gallant Teucer deals destruction there, 
Skilla__d or with shafts to gall the distant field, 
Or bear close battle on the sounding shield. 
These can the rage of haughty Hector tame: 
Safe in their arms, the navy fears no flame, 
Till Jove himself descends, his bolts to shed, 
And hurl the blazing ruin at our head. 
Great must he be, of more than human birth, 
Nor feed like mortals on the fruits of earth. 
Him neither rocks can crush, nor steel can wound, 
Whom Ajax fells not on the ensanguined ground. 
In standing fight he mates Achillesa__ force, 
Excella__d alone in swiftness in the course. 
Then to the left our ready arms apply, 
And live with glory, or with glory die.a__ 
He said: and Merion to tha__ appointed place, 
Fierce as the god of battles, urged his pace. 
Soon as the foe the shining chiefs beheld 
Rush like a fiery torrent oa__er the field, 
Their force embodied in a tide they pour; 
The rising combat sounds along the shore. 
As warring winds, in Siriusa__ sultry reign, 
From different quarters sweep the sandy plain; 
On every side the dusty whirlwinds rise, 
And the dry fields are lifted to the skies: 
Thus by despair, hope, rage, together driven, 
Met the black hosts, and, meeting, darkena__d heaven. 
All dreadful glared the iron face of war, 
Bristled with upright spears, that flasha__d afar; 
Dire was the gleam of breastplates, helms, and shields, 
And polisha__d arms emblazed the flaming fields: 
[pg 240] 
Tremendous scene! that general horror gave, 
But toucha__d with joy the bosoms of the brave. 
Saturna__s great sons in fierce contention vied, 
And crowds of heroes in their anger died. 
The sire of earth and heaven, by Thetis won 
To crown with glory Peleusa__ godlike son, 
Willa__d not destruction to the Grecian powers, 
But spared awhile the destined Trojan towers; 
While Neptune, rising from his azure main, 
Warra__d on the king of heaven with stern disdain, 
And breathed revenge, and fired the Grecian train. 
Gods of one source, of one ethereal race, 
Alike divine, and heaven their native place; 
But Jove the greater; first-born of the skies, 
And more than men, or gods, supremely wise. 
For this, of Jovea__s superior might afraid, 
Neptune in human form conceala__d his aid. 
These powers enfold the Greek and Trojan train 
In war and discorda__s adamantine chain, 
Indissolubly strong: the fatal tie 
Is stretcha__d on both, and close compella__d they die. 
Dreadful in arms, and grown in combats grey, 
The bold Idomeneus controls the day. 
First by his hand Othryoneus was slain, 
Swella__d with false hopes, with mad ambition vain; 
Calla__d by the voice of war to martial fame, 
From high Cabesusa__ distant walls he came; 
Cassandraa__s love he sought, with boasts of power, 
And promised conquest was the proffera__d dower. 
The king consented, by his vaunts abused; 
The king consented, but the fates refused. 
Proud of himself, and of the imagined bride, 
The field he measured with a larger stride. 
Him as he stalka__d, the Cretan javelin found; 
Vain was his breastplate to repel the wound: 
His dream of glory lost, he plunged to hell; 
His arms resounded as the boaster fell. 
The great Idomeneus bestrides the dead; 
a_oeAnd thus (he cries) behold thy promise sped! 
Such is the help thy arms to Ilion bring, 
And such the contract of the Phrygian king! 
Our offers now, illustrious prince! receive; 
For such an aid what will not Argos give? 
To conquer Troy, with ours thy forces join, 
And count Atridesa__ fairest daughter thine. 
Meantime, on further methods to advise, 
Come, follow to the fleet thy new allies; 
There hear what Greece has on her part to say.a__ 
He spoke, and dragga__d the gory corse away. 
This Asius viewa__d, unable to contain, 
Before his chariot warring on the plain: 
[pg 241] 
(His crowded coursers, to his squire consigna__d, 
Impatient panted on his neck behind:) 
To vengeance rising with a sudden spring, 
He hoped the conquest of the Cretan king. 
The wary Cretan, as his foe drew near, 
Full on his throat discharged the forceful spear: 
Beneath the chin the point was seen to glide, 
And glittera__d, extant at the further side. 
As when the mountain-oak, or poplar tall, 
Or pine, fit mast for some great admiral, 
Groans to the oft-heaved axe, with many a wound, 
Then spreads a length of ruin oa__er the ground: 
So sunk proud Asius in that dreadful day, 
And stretcha__d before his much-loved coursers lay. 
He grinds the dust distaina__d with streaming gore, 
And, fierce in death, lies foaming on the shore. 
Deprived of motion, stiff with stupid fear, 
Stands all aghast his trembling charioteer, 
Nor shuns the foe, nor turns the steeds away, 
But falls transfixa__d, an unresisting prey: 
Pierced by Antilochus, he pants beneath 
The stately car, and labours out his breath. 
Thus Asiusa__ steeds (their mighty master gone) 
Remain the prize of Nestora__s youthful son. 
Stabba__d at the sight, Deiphobus drew nigh, 
And made, with force, the vengeful weapon fly. 
The Cretan saw; and, stooping, caused to glance 
From his slope shield the disappointed lance. 
Beneath the spacious targe, (a blazing round, 
Thick with bull-hides and brazen orbits bound, 
On his raised arm by two strong braces staya__d,) 
He lay collected in defensive shade. 
Oa__er his safe head the javelin idly sung, 
And on the tinkling verge more faintly rung. 
Even then the spear the vigorous arm confessa__d, 
And pierced, obliquely, king Hypsenora__s breast: 
Warma__d in his liver, to the ground it bore 
The chief, his peoplea__s guardian now no more! 
a_oeNot unattended (the proud Trojan cries) 
Nor unrevenged, lamented Asius lies: 
For thee, through hella__s black portals stand displaya__d, 
This mate shall joy thy melancholy shade.a__ 
Heart-piercing anguish, at the haughty boast, 
Toucha__d every Greek, but Nestora__s son the most. 
Grieved as he was, his pious arms attend, 
And his broad buckler shields his slaughtera__d friend: 
Till sad Mecistheus and Alastor bore 
His honoura__d body to the tented shore. 
Nor yet from fight Idomeneus withdraws; 
Resolved to perish in his countrya__s cause, 
[pg 242] 
Or find some foe, whom heaven and he shall doom 
To wail his fate in deatha__s eternal gloom. 
He sees Alcathous in the front aspire: 
Great A_syetes was the heroa__s sire; 
His spouse Hippodame, divinely fair, 
Anchisesa__ eldest hope, and darling care: 
Who charma__d her parentsa__ and her husbanda__s heart 
With beauty, sense, and every work of art: 
He once of Iliona__s youth the loveliest boy, 
The fairest she of all the fair of Troy. 
By Neptune now the hapless hero dies, 
Who covers with a cloud those beauteous eyes, 
And fetters every limb: yet bent to meet 
His fate he stands; nor shuns the lance of Crete. 
Fixa__d as some column, or deep-rooted oak, 
While the winds sleep; his breast received the stroke. 
Before the ponderous stroke his corslet yields, 
Long used to ward the death in fighting fields. 
The riven armour sends a jarring sound; 
His labouring heart heaves with so strong a bound, 
The long lance shakes, and vibrates in the wound; 
Fast flowing from its source, as prone he lay, 
Lifea__s purple tide impetuous gusha__d away. 
Then Idomen, insulting oa__er the slain: 
a_oeBehold, Deiphobus! nor vaunt in vain: 
See! on one Greek three Trojan ghosts attend; 
This, my third victim, to the shades I send. 
Approaching now thy boasted might approve, 
And try the prowess of the seed of Jove. 
From Jove, enamoura__d of a mortal dame, 
Great Minos, guardian of his country, came: 
Deucalion, blameless prince, was Minosa__ heir; 
His first-born I, the third from Jupiter: 
Oa__er spacious Crete, and her bold sons, I reign, 
And thence my ships transport me through the main: 
Lord of a host, oa__er all my host I shine, 
A scourge to thee, thy father, and thy line.a__ 
The Trojan heard; uncertain or to meet, 
Alone, with venturous arms the king of Crete, 
Or seek auxiliar force; at length decreed 
To call some hero to partake the deed, 
Forthwith A_neas rises to his thought: 
For him in Troya__s remotest lines he sought, 
Where he, incensed at partial Priam, stands, 
And sees superior posts in meaner hands. 
To him, ambitious of so great an aid, 
The bold Deiphobus approacha__d, and said: 
a_oeNow, Trojan prince, employ thy pious arms, 
If ea__er thy bosom felt fair honoura__s charms. 
Alcathous dies, thy brother and thy friend; 
[pg 243] 
Come, and the warriora__s loved remains defend. 
Beneath his cares thy early youth was traina__d, 
One table fed you, and one roof containa__d. 
This deed to fierce Idomeneus we owe; 
Haste, and revenge it on tha__ insulting foe.a__ 
A_neas heard, and for a space resigna__d 
To tender pity all his manly mind; 
Then rising in his rage, he burns to fight: 
The Greek awaits him with collected might. 
As the fell boar, on some rough mountaina__s head, 
Arma__d with wild terrors, and to slaughter bred, 
When the loud rustics rise, and shout from far, 
Attends the tumult, and expects the war; 
Oa__er his bent back the bristly horrors rise; 
Fires stream in lightning from his sanguine eyes, 
His foaming tusks both dogs and men engage; 
But most his hunters rouse his mighty rage: 
So stood Idomeneus, his javelin shook, 
And met the Trojan with a lowering look. 
Antilochus, Deipyrus, were near, 
The youthful offspring of the god of war, 
Merion, and Aphareus, in field renowna__d: 
To these the warrior sent his voice around. 
a_oeFellows in arms! your timely aid unite; 
Lo, great A_neas rushes to the fight: 
Sprung from a god, and more than mortal bold; 
He fresh in youth, and I in arms grown old. 
Else should this hand, this hour decide the strife, 
The great dispute, of glory, or of life.a__ 
He spoke, and all, as with one soul, obeya__d; 
Their lifted bucklers cast a dreadful shade 
Around the chief. A_neas too demands 
Tha__ assisting forces of his native bands; 
Paris, Deiphobus, Agenor, join; 
(Co-aids and captains of the Trojan line;) 
In order follow all tha__ embodied train, 
Like Idaa__s flocks proceeding oa__er the plain; 
Before his fleecy care, erect and bold, 
Stalks the proud ram, the father of the bold. 
With joy the swain surveys them, as he leads 
To the cool fountains, through the well-known meads: 
So joys A_neas, as his native band 
Moves on in rank, and stretches oa__er the land. 
Round dread Alcathous now the battle rose; 
On every side the steely circle grows; 
Now battera__d breast-plates and hacka__d helmets ring, 
And oa__er their heads unheeded javelins sing. 
Above the rest, two towering chiefs appear, 
There great Idomeneus, A_neas here. 
Like gods of war, dispensing fate, they stood, 
[pg 244] 
And burna__d to drench the ground with mutual blood. 
The Trojan weapon whizza__d along in air; 
The Cretan saw, and shunna__d the brazen spear: 
Sent from an arm so strong, the missive wood 
Stuck deep in earth, and quivera__d where it stood. 
But OEnomas received the Cretana__s stroke; 
The forceful spear his hollow corslet broke, 
It rippa__d his belly with a ghastly wound, 
And rolla__d the smoking entrails on the ground. 
Stretcha__d on the plain, he sobs away his breath, 
And, furious, grasps the bloody dust in death. 
The victor from his breast the weapon tears; 
His spoils he could not, for the shower of spears. 
Though now unfit an active war to wage, 
Heavy with cumbrous arms, stiff with cold age, 
His listless limbs unable for the course, 
In standing fight he yet maintains his force; 
Till faint with labour, and by foes repella__d, 
His tired slow steps he drags from off the field. 
Deiphobus beheld him as he passa__d, 
And, fired with hate, a parting javelin cast: 
The javelin erra__d, but held its course along, 
And pierced Ascalaphus, the brave and young: 
The son of Mars fell gasping on the ground, 
And gnasha__d the dust, all bloody with his wound. 
Nor knew the furious father of his fall; 
High-throned amidst the great Olympian hall, 
On golden clouds tha__ immortal synod sate; 
Detaina__d from bloody war by Jove and Fate. 
Now, where in dust the breathless hero lay, 
For slain Ascalaphus commenced the fray, 
Deiphobus to seize his helmet flies, 
And from his temples rends the glittering prize; 
Valiant as Mars, Meriones drew near, 
And on his loaded arm discharged his spear: 
He drops the weight, disabled with the pain; 
The hollow helmet rings against the plain. 
Swift as a vulture leaping on his prey, 
From his torn arm the Grecian rent away 
The reeking javelin, and rejoina__d his friends. 
His wounded brother good Polites tends; 
Around his waist his pious arms he threw, 
And from the rage of battle gently drew: 
Him his swift coursers, on his splendid car, 
Rapt from the lessening thunder of the war; 
To Troy they drove him, groaning from the shore, 
And sprinkling, as he passa__d, the sands with gore. 
Meanwhile fresh slaughter bathes the sanguine ground, 
Heaps fall on heaps, and heaven and earth resound. 
Bold Aphareus by great A_neas bled; 
[pg 245] 
As toward the chief he turna__d his daring head, 
He pierced his throat; the bending head, depressa__d 
Beneath his helmet, nods upon his breast; 
His shield reversed oa__er the fallen warrior lies, 
And everlasting slumber seals his eyes. 
Antilochus, as Thoon turna__d him round, 
Transpierced his back with a dishonest wound: 
The hollow vein, that to the neck extends 
Along the chine, his eager javelin rends: 
Supine he falls, and to his social train 
Spreads his imploring arms, but spreads in vain. 
Thv exulting victor, leaping where he lay, 
From his broad shoulders tore the spoils away; 
His time observed; for closed by foes around, 
On all sides thick the peals of arms resound. 
His shield embossa__d the ringing storm sustains, 
But he impervious and untoucha__d remains. 
(Great Neptunea__s care preserved from hostile rage 
This youth, the joy of Nestora__s glorious age.) 
In arms intrepid, with the first he fought, 
Faced every foe, and every danger sought; 
His winged lance, resistless as the wind, 
Obeys each motion of the mastera__s mind! 
Restless it flies, impatient to be free, 
And meditates the distant enemy. 
The son of Asius, Adamas, drew near, 
And struck his target with the brazen spear 
Fierce in his front: but Neptune wards the blow, 
And blunts the javelin of tha__ eluded foe: 
In the broad buckler half the weapon stood, 
Splintera__d on earth flew half the broken wood. 
Disarma__d, he mingled in the Trojan crew; 
But Meriona__s spear oa__ertook him as he flew, 
Deep in the bellya__s rim an entrance found, 
Where sharp the pang, and mortal is the wound. 
Bending he fell, and doubled to the ground, 
Lay panting. Thus an ox in fetters tied, 
While deatha__s strong pangs distend his labouring side, 
His bulk enormous on the field displays; 
His heaving heart beats thick as ebbing life decays. 
The spear the conqueror from his body drew, 
And deatha__s dim shadows swarm before his view. 
Next brave Deipyrus in dust was laid: 
King Helenus waved high the Thracian blade, 
And smote his temples with an arm so strong, 
The helm fell off, and rolla__d amid the throng: 
There for some luckier Greek it rests a prize; 
For dark in death the godlike owner lies! 
Raging with grief, great Menelaus burns, 
And fraught with vengeance, to the victor turns: 
[pg 246] 
That shook the ponderous lance, in act to throw; 
And this stood adverse with the bended bow: 
Full on his breast the Trojan arrow fell, 
But harmless bounded from the plated steel. 
As on some ample barna__s well hardena__d floor, 
(The winds collected at each open door,) 
While the broad fan with force is whirla__d around, 
Light leaps the golden grain, resulting from the ground: 
So from the steel that guards Atridesa__ heart, 
Repella__d to distance flies the bounding dart. 
Atrides, watchful of the unwary foe, 
Pierced with his lance the hand that graspa__d the bow. 
And nailed it to the yew: the wounded hand 
Traila__d the long lance that marka__d with blood the sand: 
But good Agenor gently from the wound 
The spear solicits, and the bandage bound; 
A slinga__s soft wool, snatcha__d from a soldiera__s side, 
At once the tent and ligature supplied. 
Behold! Pisander, urged by fatea__s decree, 
Springs through the ranks to fall, and fall by thee, 
Great Menelaus! to enchance thy fame: 
High-towering in the front, the warrior came. 
First the sharp lance was by Atrides thrown; 
The lance far distant by the winds was blown. 
Nor pierced Pisander through Atridesa__ shield: 
Pisandera__s spear fell shivera__d on the field. 
Not so discouraged, to the future blind, 
Vain dreams of conquest swell his haughty mind; 
Dauntless he rushes where the Spartan lord 
Like lightning brandisha__d his far beaming sword. 
His left arm high opposed the shining shield: 
His right beneath, the covera__d pole-axe held; 
(An olivea__s cloudy grain the handle made, 
Distinct with studs, and brazen was the blade;) 
This on the helm discharged a noble blow; 
The plume droppa__d nodding to the plain below, 
Shorn from the crest. Atrides waved his steel: 
Deep through his front the weighty falchion fell; 
The crashing bones before its force gave way; 
In dust and blood the groaning hero lay: 
Forced from their ghastly orbs, and spouting gore, 
The clotted eye-balls tumble on the shore. 
And fierce Atrides spurna__d him as he bled, 
Tore off his arms, and, loud-exulting, said: 
a_oeThus, Trojans, thus, at length be taught to fear; 
O race perfidious, who delight in war! 
Already noble deeds ye have performa__d; 
A princess raped transcends a navy storma__d: 
In such bold feats your impious might approve, 
Without tha__ assistance, or the fear of Jove. 
[pg 247] 
The violated rites, the ravisha__d dame; 
Our heroes slaughtera__d and our ships on flame, 
Crimes heapa__d on crimes, shall bend your glory down, 
And whelm in ruins yon flagitious town. 
O thou, great father! lord of earth and skies, 
Above the thought of man, supremely wise! 
If from thy hand the fates of mortals flow, 
From whence this favour to an impious foe? 
A godless crew, abandona__d and unjust, 
Still breathing rapine, violence, and lust? 
The best of things, beyond their measure, cloy; 
Sleepa__s balmy blessing, lovea__s endearing joy; 
The feast, the dance; whatea__er mankind desire, 
Even the sweet charms of sacred numbers tire. 
But Troy for ever reaps a dire delight 
In thirst of slaughter, and in lust of fight.a__ 
This said, he seized (while yet the carcase heaved) 
The bloody armour, which his train received: 
Then sudden mixa__d among the warring crew, 
And the bold son of Pylaemenes slew. 
Harpalion had through Asia travella__d far, 
Following his martial father to the war: 
Through filial love he left his native shore, 
Never, ah, never to behold it more! 
His unsuccessful spear he chanced to fling 
Against the target of the Spartan king; 
Thus of his lance disarma__d, from death he flies, 
And turns around his apprehensive eyes. 
Him, through the hip transpiercing as he fled, 
The shaft of Merion mingled with the dead. 
Beneath the bone the glancing point descends, 
And, driving down, the swelling bladder rends: 
Sunk in his sad companionsa__ arms he lay, 
And in short pantings sobba__d his soul away; 
(Like some vile worm extended on the ground;) 
While lifea__s red torrent gusha__d from out the wound. 
Him on his car the Paphlagonian train 
In slow procession bore from off the plain. 
The pensive father, father now no more! 
Attends the mournful pomp along the shore; 
And unavailing tears profusely shed; 
And, unrevenged, deplored his offspring dead. 
Paris from far the moving sight beheld, 
With pity softena__d and with fury swella__d: 
His honoura__d host, a youth of matchless grace, 
And loved of all the Paphlagonian race! 
With his full strength he bent his angry bow, 
And winga__d the feathera__d vengeance at the foe. 
A chief there was, the brave Euchenor named, 
For riches much, and more for virtue famed. 
[pg 248] 
Who held his seat in Corintha__s stately town; 
Polydusa__ son, a seer of old renown. 
Oft had the father told his early doom, 
By arms abroad, or slow disease at home: 
He climba__d his vessel, prodigal of breath, 
And chose the certain glorious path to death. 
Beneath his ear the pointed arrow went; 
The soul came issuing at the narrow vent: 
His limbs, unnerved, drop useless on the ground, 
And everlasting darkness shades him round. 
Nor knew great Hector how his legions yield, 
(Wrappa__d in the cloud and tumult of the field:) 
Wide on the left the force of Greece commands, 
And conquest hovers oa__er tha__ Achaian bands; 
With such a tide superior virtue swaya__d, 
And he that shakes the solid earth gave aid. 
But in the centre Hector fixa__d remaina__d, 
Where first the gates were forced, and bulwarks gaina__d; 
There, on the margin of the hoary deep, 
(Their naval station where the Ajaces keep. 
And where low walls confine the beating tides, 
Whose humble barrier scarce the foe divides; 
Where late in fight both foot and horse engaged, 
And all the thunder of the battle raged,) 
There joina__d, the whole Boeotian strength remains, 
The proud Iaonians with their sweeping trains, 
Locrians and Phthians, and tha__ Epaean force; 
But joina__d, repel not Hectora__s fiery course. 
The flower of Athens, Stichius, Phidas, led; 
Bias and great Menestheus at their head: 
Meges the strong the Epaean bands controlla__d, 
And Dracius prudent, and Amphion bold: 
The Phthians, Medon, famed for martial might, 
And brave Podarces, active in the fight. 
This drew from Phylacus his noble line; 
Iphiclusa__ son: and that (Oileus) thine: 
(Young Ajaxa__ brother, by a stolen embrace; 
He dwelt far distant from his native place, 
By his fierce step-dame from his fathera__s reign 
Expella__d and exiled for her brother slain:) 
These rule the Phthians, and their arms employ, 
Mixa__d with Boeotians, on the shores of Troy. 
Now side by side, with like unwearied care, 
Each Ajax laboured through the field of war: 
So when two lordly bulls, with equal toil, 
Force the bright ploughshare through the fallow soil, 
Joina__d to one yoke, the stubborn earth they tear, 
And trace large furrows with the shining share; 
Oa__er their huge limbs the foam descends in snow, 
And streams of sweat down their sour foreheads flow. 
[pg 249] 
A train of heroes followed through the field, 
Who bore by turns great Ajaxa__ sevenfold shield; 
Whenea__er he breathed, remissive of his might, 
Tired with the incessant slaughters of the fight. 
No following troops his brave associate grace: 
In close engagement an unpractised race, 
The Locrian squadrons nor the javelin wield, 
Nor bear the helm, nor lift the moony shield; 
But skilla__d from far the flying shaft to wing, 
Or whirl the sounding pebble from the sling, 
Dexterous with these they aim a certain wound, 
Or fell the distant warrior to the ground. 
Thus in the van the Telamonian train, 
Thronga__d in bright arms, a pressing fight maintain: 
Far in the rear the Locrian archers lie, 
Whose stones and arrows intercept the sky, 
The mingled tempest on the foes they pour; 
Troya__s scattering orders open to the shower. 
Now had the Greeks eternal fame acquired, 
And the galla__d Ilians to their walls retired; 
But sage Polydamas, discreetly brave, 
Addressa__d great Hector, and this counsel gave: 
a_oeThough great in all, thou seema__st averse to lend 
Impartial audience to a faithful friend; 
To gods and men thy matchless worth is known, 
And every art of glorious war thy own; 
But in cool thought and counsel to excel, 
How widely differs this from warring well! 
Content with what the bounteous gods have given, 
Seek not alone to engross the gifts of Heaven. 
To some the powers of bloody war belong, 
To some sweet music and the charm of song; 
To few, and wondrous few, has Jove assigna__d 
A wise, extensive, all-considering mind; 
Their guardians these, the nations round confess, 
And towns and empires for their safety bless. 
If Heaven have lodged this virtue in my breast, 
Attend, O Hector! what I judge the best, 
See, as thou mova__st, on dangers dangers spread, 
And wara__s whole fury burns around thy head. 
Behold! distressa__d within yon hostile wall, 
How many Trojans yield, disperse, or fall! 
What troops, out-numbera__d, scarce the war maintain! 
And what brave heroes at the ships lie slain! 
Here cease thy fury: and, the chiefs and kings 
Convoked to council, weigh the sum of things. 
Whether (the gods succeeding our desires) 
To yon tall ships to bear the Trojan fires; 
Or quit the fleet, and pass unhurt away, 
Contented with the conquest of the day. 
[pg 250] 
I fear, I fear, lest Greece, not yet undone, 
Pay the large debt of last revolving sun; 
Achilles, great Achilles, yet remains 
On yonder decks, and yet oa__erlooks the plains!a__ 
The counsel pleased; and Hector, with a bound, 
Leapa__d from his chariot on the trembling ground; 
Swift as he leapa__d his clanging arms resound. 
a_oeTo guard this post (he cried) thy art employ, 
And here detain the scattera__d youth of Troy; 
Where yonder heroes faint, I bend my way, 
And hasten back to end the doubtful day.a__ 
This said, the towering chief prepares to go, 
Shakes his white plumes that to the breezes flow, 
And seems a moving mountain toppa__d with snow. 
Through all his host, inspiring force, he flies, 
And bids anew the martial thunder rise. 
To Panthusa__ son, at Hectora__s high command 
Haste the bold leaders of the Trojan band: 
But round the battlements, and round the plain, 
For many a chief he looka__d, but looka__d in vain; 
Deiphobus, nor Helenus the seer, 
Nor Asiusa__ son, nor Asiusa__ self appear: 
For these were pierced with many a ghastly wound, 
Some cold in death, some groaning on the ground; 
Some low in dust, (a mournful object) lay; 
High on the wall some breathed their souls away. 
Far on the left, amid the throng he found 
(Cheering the troops, and dealing deaths around) 
The graceful Paris; whom, with fury moved, 
Opprobrious thus, tha__ impatient chief reproved: 
a_oeIll-fated Paris! slave to womankind, 
As smooth of face as fraudulent of mind! 
Where is Deiphobus, where Asius gone? 
The godlike father, and tha__ intrepid son? 
The force of Helenus, dispensing fate; 
And great Othryoneus, so feara__d of late? 
Black fate hanga__s oa__er thee from tha__ avenging gods, 
Imperial Troy from her foundations nods; 
Whelma__d in thy countrya__s ruin shalt thou fall, 
And one devouring vengeance swallow all.a__ 
When Paris thus: a_oeMy brother and my friend, 
Thy warm impatience makes thy tongue offend, 
In other battles I deserved thy blame, 
Though then not deedless, nor unknown to fame: 
But since yon rampart by thy arms lay low, 
I scattera__d slaughter from my fatal bow. 
The chiefs you seek on yonder shore lie slain; 
Of all those heroes, two alone remain; 
Deiphobus, and Helenus the seer, 
Each now disabled by a hostile spear. 
[pg 251] 
Go then, successful, where thy soul inspires: 
This heart and hand shall second all thy fires: 
What with this arm I can, prepare to know, 
Till death for death be paid, and blow for blow. 
But a__tis not ours, with forces not our own 
To combat: strength is of the gods alone.a__ 
These words the heroa__s angry mind assuage: 
Then fierce they mingle where the thickest rage. 
Around Polydamas, distaina__d with blood, 
Cebrion, Phalces, stern Orthaeus stood, 
Palmus, with Polypoetes the divine, 
And two bold brothers of Hippotiona__s line 
(Who reacha__d fair Ilion, from Ascania far, 
The former day; the next engaged in war). 
As when from gloomy clouds a whirlwind springs, 
That bears Jovea__s thunder on its dreadful wings, 
Wide oa__er the blasted fields the tempest sweeps; 
Then, gathera__d, settles on the hoary deeps; 
The afflicted deeps tumultuous mix and roar; 
The waves behind impel the waves before, 
Wide rolling, foaming high, and tumbling to the shore: 
Thus rank on rank, the thick battalions throng, 
Chief urged on chief, and man drove man along. 
Far oa__er the plains, in dreadful order bright, 
The brazen arms reflect a beamy light: 
Full in the blazing van great Hector shined, 
Like Mars commissiona__d to confound mankind. 
Before him flaming his enormous shield, 
Like the broad sun, illumined all the field; 
His nodding helm emits a streamy ray; 
His piercing eyes through all the battle stray, 
And, while beneath his targe he flasha__d along, 
Shot terrors round, that withera__d ea__en the strong. 
Thus stalka__d he, dreadful; death was in his look: 
Whole nations feara__d; but not an Argive shook. 
The towering Ajax, with an ample stride, 
Advanced the first, and thus the chief defied: 
a_oeHector! come on; thy empty threats forbear; 
a__Tis not thy arm, a__tis thundering Jove we fear: 
The skill of war to us not idly given, 
Lo! Greece is humbled, not by Troy, but Heaven. 
Vain are the hopes that haughty mind imparts, 
To force our fleet: the Greeks have hands and hearts. 
Long ere in flames our lofty navy fall, 
Your boasted city, and your god-built wall, 
Shall sink beneath us, smoking on the ground; 
And spread a long unmeasured ruin round. 
The time shall come, when, chased along the plain, 
Even thou shalt call on Jove, and call in vain; 
Even thou shalt wish, to aid thy desperate course, 
[pg 252] 
The wings of falcons for thy flying horse; 
Shalt run, forgetful of a warriora__s fame, 
While clouds of friendly dust conceal thy shame.a__ 
As thus he spoke, behold, in open view, 
On sounding wings a dexter eagle flew. 
To Jovea__s glad omen all the Grecians rise, 
And hail, with shouts, his progress through the skies: 
Far-echoing clamours bound from side to side; 
They ceased; and thus the chief of Troy replied: 
a_oeFrom whence this menace, this insulting strain? 
Enormous boaster! dooma__d to vaunt in vain. 
So may the gods on Hector life bestow, 
(Not that short life which mortals lead below, 
But such as those of Jovea__s high lineage born, 
The blue-eyed maid, or he that gilds the morn,) 
As this decisive day shall end the fame 
Of Greece, and Argos be no more a name. 
And thou, imperious! if thy madness wait 
The lance of Hector, thou shalt meet thy fate: 
That giant-corse, extended on the shore, 
Shall largely feast the fowls with fat and gore.a__ 
He said; and like a lion stalka__d along: 
With shouts incessant earth and ocean rung, 
Sent from his following host: the Grecian train 
With answering thunders filla__d the echoing plain; 
A shout that tore heavena__s concave, and, above, 
Shook the fixa__d splendours of the throne of Jove. 
Illustration: GREEK EARRINGS. 
GREEK EARRINGS. 
[pg 253] 
BOOK XIV. 
ARGUMENT.231 
JUNO DECEIVES JUPITER BY THE GIRDLE OF VENUS. 
Nestor, sitting at the table with Machaon, is alarmed with the 
increasing clamour of war, and hastens to Agamemnon; on his way he 
meets that prince with Diomed and Ulysses, whom he informs of the 
extremity of the danger. Agamemnon proposes to make their escape by 
night, which Ulysses withstands; to which Diomed adds his advice, that, 
wounded as they were, they should go forth and encourage the army with 
their presence, which advice is pursued. Juno, seeing the partiality of 
Jupiter to the Trojans, forms a design to over-reach him: she sets off 
her charms with the utmost care, and (the more surely to enchant him) 
obtains the magic girdle of Venus. She then applies herself to the god 
of sleep, and, with some difficulty, persuades him to seal the eyes of 
Jupiter: this done, she goes to mount Ida, where the god, at first 
sight, is ravished with her beauty, sinks in her embraces, and is laid 
asleep. Neptune takes advantage of his slumber, and succours the 
Greeks: Hector is struck to the ground with a prodigious stone by Ajax, 
and carried off from the battle: several actions succeed, till the 
Trojans, much distressed, are obliged to give way: the lesser Ajax 
signalizes himself in a particular manner. 
But not the genial feast, nor flowing bowl, 
Could charm the cares of Nestora__s watchful soul; 
His startled ears the increasing cries attend; 
Then thus, impatient, to his wounded friend: 
a_oeWhat new alarm, divine Machaon, say, 
What mixa__d events attend this mighty day? 
Hark! how the shouts divide, and how they meet, 
And now come full, and thicken to the fleet! 
Here with the cordial draught dispel thy care, 
Let Hecamede the strengthening bath prepare, 
Refresh thy wound, and cleanse the clotted gore; 
While I the adventures of the day explore.a__ 
He said: and, seizing Thrasymedesa__ shield, 
(His valiant offspring,) hastena__d to the field; 
(That day the son his fathera__s buckler bore;) 
Then snatcha__d a lance, and issued from the door. 
Soon as the prospect opena__d to his view, 
[pg 254] 
His wounded eyes the scene of sorrow knew; 
Dire disarray! the tumult of the fight, 
The wall in ruins, and the Greeks in flight. 
As when old oceana__s silent surface sleeps, 
The waves just heaving on the purple deeps: 
While yet the expected tempest hangs on high, 
Weighs down the cloud, and blackens in the sky, 
The mass of waters will no wind obey; 
Jove sends one gust, and bids them roll away. 
While wavering counsels thus his mind engage, 
Fluctuates in doubtful thought the Pylian sage, 
To join the host, or to the general haste; 
Debating long, he fixes on the last: 
Yet, as he moves, the sight his bosom warms, 
The field rings dreadful with the clang of arms, 
The gleaming falchions flash, the javelins fly; 
Blows echo blows, and all or kill or die. 
Him, in his march, the wounded princes meet, 
By tardy steps ascending from the fleet: 
The king of men, Ulysses the divine, 
And who to Tydeus owes his noble line.232 
(Their ships at distance from the battle stand, 
In lines advanced along the shelving strand: 
Whose bay, the fleet unable to contain 
At length; beside the margin of the main, 
Rank above rank, the crowded ships they moor: 
Who landed first, lay highest on the shore.) 
Supported on the spears, they took their way, 
Unfit to fight, but anxious for the day. 
Nestora__s approach alarma__d each Grecian breast, 
Whom thus the general of the host addressa__d: 
a_oeO grace and glory of the Achaian name; 
What drives thee, Nestor, from the field of fame? 
Shall then proud Hector see his boast fulfilla__d, 
Our fleets in ashes, and our heroes killa__d? 
Such was his threat, ah! now too soon made good, 
On many a Grecian bosom writ in blood. 
Is every heart inflamed with equal rage 
Against your king, nor will one chief engage? 
And have I lived to see with mournful eyes 
In every Greek a new Achilles rise?a__ 
Gerenian Nestor then: a_oeSo fate has willa__d; 
And all-confirming time has fate fulfilla__d. 
Not he that thunders from the aerial bower, 
Not Jove himself, upon the past has power. 
The wall, our late inviolable bound, 
And best defence, lies smoking on the ground: 
Even to the ships their conquering arms extend, 
And groans of slaughtera__d Greeks to heaven ascend. 
[pg 255] 
On speedy measures then employ your thought 
In such distress! if counsel profit aught: 
Arms cannot much: though Mars our souls incite, 
These gaping wounds withhold us from the fight.a__ 
To him the monarch: a_oeThat our army bends, 
That Troy triumphant our high fleet ascends, 
And that the rampart, late our surest trust 
And best defence, lies smoking in the dust; 
All this from Jovea__s afflictive hand we bear, 
Who, far from Argos, wills our ruin here. 
Past are the days when happier Greece was blest, 
And all his favour, all his aid confessa__d; 
Now heaven averse, our hands from battle ties, 
And lifts the Trojan glory to the skies. 
Cease we at length to waste our blood in vain, 
And launch what ships lie nearest to the main; 
Leave these at anchor, till the coming night: 
Then, if impetuous Troy forbear the fight, 
Bring all to sea, and hoist each sail for flight. 
Better from evils, well foreseen, to run, 
Than perish in the danger we may shun.a__ 
Thus he. The sage Ulysses thus replies, 
While anger flasha__d from his disdainful eyes: 
a_oeWhat shameful words (unkingly as thou art) 
Fall from that trembling tongue and timorous heart? 
Oh were thy sway the curse of meaner powers, 
And thou the shame of any host but ours! 
A host, by Jove endued with martial might, 
And taught to conquer, or to fall in fight: 
Adventurous combats and bold wars to wage, 
Employa__d our youth, and yet employs our age. 
And wilt thou thus desert the Trojan plain? 
And have whole streams of blood been spilt in vain? 
In such base sentence if thou couch thy fear, 
Speak it in whispers, lest a Greek should hear. 
Lives there a man so dead to fame, who dares 
To think such meanness, or the thought declares? 
And comes it even from him whose sovereign sway 
The banded legions of all Greece obey? 
Is this a generala__s voice that calls to flight, 
While war hangs doubtful, while his soldiers fight? 
What more could Troy? What yet their fate denies 
Thou givest the foe: all Greece becomes their prize. 
No more the troops (our hoisted sails in view, 
Themselves abandona__d) shall the fight pursue; 
But thy ships flying, with despair shall see; 
And owe destruction to a prince like thee.a__ 
a_oeThy just reproofs (Atrides calm replies) 
Like arrows pierce me, for thy words are wise. 
Unwilling as I am to lose the host, 
[pg 256] 
I force not Greece to quit this hateful coast; 
Glad I submit, whoea__er, or young, or old, 
Aught, more conducive to our weal, unfold.a__ 
Tydides cut him short, and thus began: 
a_oeSuch counsel if you seek, behold the man 
Who boldly gives it, and what he shall say, 
Young though he be, disdain not to obey: 
A youth, who from the mighty Tydeus springs, 
May speak to councils and assembled kings. 
Hear then in me the great OEnidesa__ son, 
Whose honoured dust (his race of glory run) 
Lies whelma__d in ruins of the Theban wall; 
Brave in his life, and glorious in his fall. 
With three bold sons was generous Prothous blessa__d, 
Who Pleurona__s walls and Calydon possessa__d; 
Melas and Agrius, but (who far surpassa__d 
The rest in courage) OEneus was the last. 
From him, my sire. From Calydon expella__d, 
He passa__d to Argos, and in exile dwella__d; 
The monarcha__s daughter there (so Jove ordaina__d) 
He won, and flourisha__d where Adrastus reigna__d; 
There, rich in fortunea__s gifts, his acres tilla__d, 
Beheld his vines their liquid harvest yield, 
And numerous flocks that whitena__d all the field. 
Such Tydeus was, the foremost once in fame! 
Nor lives in Greece a stranger to his name. 
Then, what for common good my thoughts inspire, 
Attend, and in the son respect the sire. 
Though sore of battle, though with wounds oppressa__d, 
Let each go forth, and animate the rest, 
Advance the glory which he cannot share, 
Though not partaker, witness of the war. 
But lest new wounds on wounds oa__erpower us quite, 
Beyond the missile javelina__s sounding flight, 
Safe let us stand; and, from the tumult far, 
Inspire the ranks, and rule the distant war.a__ 
He added not: the listening kings obey, 
Slow moving on; Atrides leads the way. 
The god of ocean (to inflame their rage) 
Appears a warrior furrowed oa__er with age; 
Pressa__d in his own, the generala__s hand he took, 
And thus the venerable hero spoke: 
a_oeAtrides! lo! with what disdainful eye 
Achilles sees his countrya__s forces fly; 
Blind, impious man! whose anger is his guide, 
Who glories in unutterable pride. 
So may he perish, so may Jove disclaim 
The wretch relentless, and oa__erwhelm with shame! 
But Heaven forsakes not thee: oa__er yonder sands 
Soon shall thou view the scattered Trojan bands 
[pg 257] 
Fly diverse; while proud kings, and chiefs renowna__d, 
Driven heaps on heaps, with clouds involved around 
Of rolling dust, their winged wheels employ 
To hide their ignominious heads in Troy.a__ 
He spoke, then rusha__d amid the warrior crew, 
And sent his voice before him as he flew, 
Loud, as the shout encountering armies yield 
When twice ten thousand shake the labouring field; 
Such was the voice, and such the thundering sound 
Of him whose trident rends the solid ground. 
Each Argive bosom beats to meet the fight, 
And grisly war appears a pleasing sight. 
Meantime Saturnia from Olympusa__ brow, 
High-throned in gold, beheld the fields below; 
With joy the glorious conflict she surveya__d, 
Where her great brother gave the Grecians aid. 
But placed aloft, on Idaa__s shady height 
She sees her Jove, and trembles at the sight. 
Jove to deceive, what methods shall she try, 
What arts, to blind his all-beholding eye? 
At length she trusts her power; resolved to prove 
The old, yet still successful, cheat of love; 
Against his wisdom to oppose her charms, 
And lull the lord of thunders in her arms. 
Swift to her bright apartment she repairs, 
Sacred to dress and beautya__s pleasing cares: 
With skill divine had Vulcan forma__d the bower, 
Safe from access of each intruding power. 
Toucha__d with her secret key, the doors unfold: 
Self-closed, behind her shut the valves of gold. 
Here first she bathes; and round her body pours 
Soft oils of fragrance, and ambrosial showers: 
The winds, perfumed, the balmy gale convey 
Through heaven, through earth, and all the aerial way: 
Spirit divine! whose exhalation greets 
The sense of gods with more than mortal sweets. 
Thus while she breathed of heaven, with decent pride 
Her artful hands the radiant tresses tied; 
Part on her head in shining ringlets rolla__d, 
Part oa__er her shoulders waved like melted gold. 
Around her next a heavenly mantle flowa__d, 
That rich with Pallasa__ laboura__d colours glowa__d: 
Large clasps of gold the foldings gathera__d round, 
A golden zone her swelling bosom bound. 
Far-beaming pendants tremble in her ear, 
Each gem illumined with a triple star. 
Then oa__er her head she cast a veil more white 
Than new-fallen snow, and dazzling as the light. 
Last her fair feet celestial sandals grace. 
Thus issuing radiant with majestic pace, 
[pg 258] 
Forth from the dome the imperial goddess moves, 
And calls the mother of the smiles and loves. 
a_oeHow long (to Venus thus apart she cried) 
Shall human strife celestial minds divide? 
Ah yet, will Venus aid Saturniaa__s joy, 
And set aside the cause of Greece and Troy?a__ 
a_oeLet heavena__s dread empress (Cytheraea said) 
Speak her request, and deem her will obeya__d.a__ 
a_oeThen grant me (said the queen) those conquering charms, 
That power, which mortals and immortals warms, 
That love, which melts mankind in fierce desires, 
And burns the sons of heaven with sacred fires! 
a_oeFor lo! I haste to those remote abodes, 
Where the great parents, (sacred source of gods!) 
Ocean and Tethys their old empire keep, 
On the last limits of the land and deep. 
In their kind arms my tender years were past; 
What time old Saturn, from Olympus cast, 
Of upper heaven to Jove resigna__d the reign, 
Whelma__d under the huge mass of earth and main. 
For strife, I hear, has made the union cease, 
Which held so long that ancient pair in peace. 
What honour, and what love, shall I obtain, 
If I compose those fatal feuds again; 
Once more their minds in mutual ties engage, 
And, what my youth has owed, repay their age!a__ 
She said. With awe divine, the queen of love 
Obeya__d the sister and the wife of Jove; 
And from her fragrant breast the zone embraced,233 
With various skill and high embroidery graced. 
In this was every art, and every charm, 
To win the wisest, and the coldest warm: 
Fond love, the gentle vow, the gay desire, 
The kind deceit, the still-reviving fire, 
Persuasive speech, and the more persuasive sighs, 
Silence that spoke, and eloquence of eyes. 
This on her hand the Cyprian Goddess laid: 
a_oeTake this, and with it all thy wish;a__ she said. 
With smiles she took the charm; and smiling pressa__d 
The powerful cestus to her snowy breast. 
Then Venus to the courts of Jove withdrew; 
Whilst from Olympus pleased Saturnia flew. 
Oa__er high Pieria thence her course she bore, 
Oa__er fair Emathiaa__s ever-pleasing shore, 
Oa__er Hemusa__ hills with snows eternal crowna__d; 
[pg 259] 
Nor once her flying foot approacha__d the ground. 
Then taking wing from Athosa__ lofty steep, 
She speeds to Lemnos oa__er the rolling deep, 
And seeks the cave of Deatha__s half-brother, Sleep.234 
a_oeSweet pleasing Sleep! (Saturnia thus began) 
Who spreada__st thy empire oa__er each god and man; 
If ea__er obsequious to thy Junoa__s will, 
O power of slumbers! hear, and favour still. 
Shed thy soft dews on Jovea__s immortal eyes, 
While sunk in lovea__s entrancing joys he lies. 
A splendid footstool, and a throne, that shine 
With gold unfading, Somnus, shall be thine; 
The work of Vulcan; to indulge thy ease, 
When wine and feasts thy golden humours please.a__ 
a_oeImperial dame (the balmy power replies), 
Great Saturna__s heir, and empress of the skies! 
Oa__er other gods I spread my easy chain; 
The sire of all, old Ocean, owns my reign. 
And his husha__d waves lie silent on the main. 
But how, unbidden, shall I dare to steep 
Jovea__s awful temples in the dew of sleep? 
Long since, too venturous, at thy bold command, 
On those eternal lids I laid my hand; 
What time, deserting Iliona__s wasted plain, 
His conquering son, Alcides, plougha__d the main. 
When lo! the deeps arise, the tempests roar, 
And drive the hero to the Coan shore: 
Great Jove, awaking, shook the blest abodes 
With rising wrath, and tumbled gods on gods; 
Me chief he sought, and from the realms on high 
Had hurla__d indignant to the nether sky, 
But gentle Night, to whom I fled for aid, 
(The friend of earth and heaven,) her wings displaya__d; 
Impowera__d the wrath of gods and men to tame, 
Even Jove revered the venerable dame.a__ 
a_oeVain are thy fears (the queen of heaven replies, 
And, speaking, rolls her large majestic eyes); 
Thinka__st thou that Troy has Jovea__s high favour won, 
Like great Alcides, his all-conquering son? 
Hear, and obey the mistress of the skies, 
Nor for the deed expect a vulgar prize; 
For know, thy loved-one shall be ever thine, 
The youngest Grace, Pasithae the divine.a__235 
a_oeSwear then (he said) by those tremendous floods 
That roar through hell, and bind the invoking gods: 
[pg 260] 
Let the great parent earth one hand sustain, 
And stretch the other oa__er the sacred main: 
Call the black Titans, that with Chronos dwell, 
To hear and witness from the depths of hell; 
That she, my loved-one, shall be ever mine, 
The youngest Grace, Pasithae the divine.a__ 
The queen assents, and from the infernal bowers 
Invokes the sable subtartarean powers, 
And those who rule the inviolable floods, 
Whom mortals name the dread Titanian gods. 
Illustration: SLEEP ESCAPING FROM THE WRATH OF JUPITER. 
SLEEP ESCAPING FROM THE WRATH OF JUPITER. 
Then swift as wind, oa__er Lemnosa__ smoky isle 
They wing their way, and Imbrusa__ sea-beat soil; 
Through air, unseen, involved in darkness glide, 
And light on Lectos, on the point of Ide: 
(Mother of savages, whose echoing hills 
Are heard resounding with a hundred rills:) 
Fair Ida trembles underneath the god; 
Husha__d are her mountains, and her forests nod. 
There on a fir, whose spiry branches rise 
To join its summit to the neighbouring skies; 
Dark in embowering shade, conceala__d from sight, 
Sat Sleep, in likeness of the bird of night. 
(Chalcis his name by those of heavenly birth, 
But calla__d Cymindis by the race of earth.) 
[pg 261] 
To Idaa__s top successful Juno flies; 
Great Jove surveys her with desiring eyes: 
The god, whose lightning sets the heavens on fire, 
Through all his bosom feels the fierce desire; 
Fierce as when first by stealth he seized her charms, 
Mixa__d with her soul, and melted in her arms: 
Fixa__d on her eyes he fed his eager look, 
Then pressa__d her hand, and thus with transport spoke: 
a_oeWhy comes my goddess from the ethereal sky, 
And not her steeds and flaming chariot nigh?a__ 
Then shea_"a_oeI haste to those remote abodes 
Where the great parents of the deathless gods, 
The reverend Ocean and gray Tethys, reign, 
On the last limits of the land and main. 
I visit these, to whose indulgent cares 
I owe the nursing of my tender years: 
For strife, I hear, has made that union cease 
Which held so long that ancient pair in peace. 
The steeds, prepared my chariot to convey 
Oa__er earth and seas, and through the aerial way, 
Wait under Ide: of thy superior power 
To ask consent, I leave the Olympian bower; 
Nor seek, unknown to thee, the sacred cells 
Deep under seas, where hoary Ocean dwells.a__ 
a_oeFor that (said Jove) suffice another day! 
But eager love denies the least delay. 
Let softer cares the present hour employ, 
And be these moments sacred all to joy. 
Nea__er did my soul so strong a passion prove, 
Or for an earthly, or a heavenly love: 
Not when I pressa__d Ixiona__s matchless dame, 
Whence rose Pirithous like the gods in fame: 
Not when fair Danae felt the shower of gold 
Stream into life, whence Perseus brave and bold. 
Not thus I burna__d for either Theban dame: 
(Bacchus from this, from that Alcides came:) 
Nor Phoenixa__ daughter, beautiful and young, 
Whence godlike Rhadamanth and Minos sprung.236 
Not thus I burna__d for fair Latonaa__s face, 
Nor comelier Ceresa__ more majestic grace. 
Not thus even for thyself I felt desire, 
As now my veins receive the pleasing fire.a__ 
He spoke; the goddess with the charming eyes 
[pg 262] 
Glows with celestial red, and thus replies: 
a_oeIs this a scene for love? On Idaa__s height, 
Exposed to mortal and immortal sight! 
Our joys profaned by each familiar eye; 
The sport of heaven, and fable of the sky: 
How shall I ea__er review the blest abodes, 
Or mix among the senate of the gods? 
Shall I not think, that, with disordera__d charms, 
All heaven beholds me recent from thy arms? 
With skill divine has Vulcan forma__d thy bower, 
Sacred to love and to the genial hour; 
If such thy will, to that recess retire, 
In secret there indulge thy soft desire.a__ 
She ceased; and, smiling with superior love, 
Thus answera__d mild the cloud-compelling Jove: 
a_oeNor god nor mortal shall our joys behold, 
Shaded with clouds, and circumfused in gold; 
Not even the sun, who darts through heaven his rays, 
And whose broad eye the extended earth surveys.a__ 
Gazing he spoke, and, kindling at the view, 
His eager arms around the goddess threw. 
Glad Earth perceives, and from her bosom pours 
Unbidden herbs and voluntary flowers: 
Thick new-born violets a soft carpet spread, 
And clustering lotos swella__d the rising bed, 
And sudden hyacinths the turf bestrow,237 
And flamy crocus made the mountain glow 
There golden clouds conceal the heavenly pair, 
Steepa__d in soft joys and circumfused with air; 
Celestial dews, descending oa__er the ground, 
Perfume the mount, and breathe ambrosia round: 
At length, with love and sleepa__s soft power oppressa__d, 
The panting thunderer nods, and sinks to rest. 
Now to the navy borne on silent wings, 
To Neptunea__s ear soft Sleep his message brings; 
Beside him sudden, unperceived, he stood, 
And thus with gentle words addressa__d the god: 
a_oeNow, Neptune! now, the important hour employ, 
To check a while the haughty hopes of Troy: 
While Jove yet rests, while yet my vapours shed 
The golden vision round his sacred head; 
For Junoa__s love, and Somnusa__ pleasing ties, 
Have closed those awful and eternal eyes.a__ 
Thus having said, the power of slumber flew, 
On human lids to drop the balmy dew. 
Neptune, with zeal increased, renews his care, 
[pg 263] 
And towering in the foremost ranks of war, 
Indignant thusa_"a_oeOh once of martial fame! 
O Greeks! if yet ye can deserve the name! 
This half-recovera__d day shall Troy obtain? 
Shall Hector thunder at your ships again? 
Lo! still he vaunts, and threats the fleet with fires, 
While stern Achilles in his wrath retires. 
One heroa__s loss too tamely you deplore, 
Be still yourselves, and ye shall need no more. 
Oh yet, if glory any bosom warms, 
Brace on your firmest helms, and stand to arms: 
His strongest spear each valiant Grecian wield, 
Each valiant Grecian seize his broadest shield; 
Let to the weak the lighter arms belong, 
The ponderous targe be wielded by the strong. 
Thus arma__d, not Hector shall our presence stay; 
Myself, ye Greeks! myself will lead the way.a__ 
Illustration: GREEK SHIELD. 
GREEK SHIELD. 
The troops assent; their martial arms they change: 
The busy chiefs their banded legions range. 
The kings, though wounded, and oppressa__d with pain, 
With helpful hands themselves assist the train. 
The strong and cumbrous arms the valiant wield, 
The weaker warrior takes a lighter shield. 
Thus sheatha__d in shining brass, in bright array 
The legions march, and Neptune leads the way: 
His brandisha__d falchion flames before their eyes, 
Like lightning flashing through the frighted skies. 
Clad in his might, the earth-shaking power appears; 
Pale mortals tremble, and confess their fears. 
Troya__s great defender stands alone unawed, 
Arms his proud host, and dares oppose a god: 
And lo! the god, and wondrous man, appear: 
The seaa__s stern ruler there, and Hector here. 
The roaring main, at her great mastera__s call, 
Rose in huge ranks, and forma__d a watery wall 
Around the ships: seas hanging oa__er the shores, 
Both armies join: earth thunders, ocean roars. 
Not half so loud the bellowing deeps resound, 
When stormy winds disclose the dark profound; 
[pg 264] 
Less loud the winds that from the A_olian hall 
Roar through the woods, and make whole forests fall; 
Less loud the woods, when flames in torrents pour, 
Catch the dry mountain, and its shades devour; 
With such a rage the meeting hosts are driven, 
And such a clamour shakes the sounding heaven. 
The first bold javelin, urged by Hectora__s force, 
Direct at Ajaxa__ bosom winged its course; 
But there no pass the crossing belts afford, 
(One braced his shield, and one sustaina__d his sword.) 
Then back the disappointed Trojan drew, 
And cursed the lance that unavailing flew: 
But a__scaped not Ajax; his tempestuous hand 
A ponderous stone upheaving from the sand, 
(Where heaps laid loose beneath the warriora__s feet, 
Or served to ballast, or to prop the fleet,) 
Tossa__d round and round, the missive marble flings; 
On the razed shield the fallen ruin rings, 
Full on his breast and throat with force descends; 
Nor deadena__d there its giddy fury spends, 
But whirling on, with many a fiery round, 
Smokes in the dust, and ploughs into the ground. 
As when the bolt, red-hissing from above, 
Darts on the consecrated plant of Jove, 
The mountain-oak in flaming ruin lies, 
Black from the blow, and smokes of sulphur rise; 
Stiff with amaze the pale beholders stand, 
And own the terrors of the almighty hand! 
So lies great Hector prostrate on the shore; 
His slackena__d hand deserts the lance it bore; 
His following shield the fallen chief oa__erspread; 
Beneath his helmet droppa__d his fainting head; 
His load of armour, sinking to the ground, 
Clanks on the field, a dead and hollow sound. 
Loud shouts of triumph fill the crowded plain; 
Greece sees, in hope, Troya__s great defender slain: 
All spring to seize him; storms of arrows fly, 
And thicker javelins intercept the sky. 
In vain an iron tempest hisses round; 
He lies protected, and without a wound.238 
Polydamas, Agenor the divine, 
The pious warrior of Anchisesa__ line, 
And each bold leader of the Lycian band, 
With covering shields (a friendly circle) stand, 
[pg 265] 
His mournful followers, with assistant care, 
The groaning hero to his chariot bear; 
His foaming coursers, swifter than the wind, 
Speed to the town, and leave the war behind. 
When now they toucha__d the meada__s enamella__d side, 
Where gentle Xanthus rolls his easy tide, 
With watery drops the chief they sprinkle round, 
Placed on the margin of the flowery ground. 
Raised on his knees, he now ejects the gore; 
Now faints anew, low-sinking on the shore; 
By fits he breathes, half views the fleeting skies, 
And seals again, by fits, his swimming eyes. 
Soon as the Greeks the chiefa__s retreat beheld, 
With double fury each invades the field. 
Oilean Ajax first his javelin sped, 
Pierced by whose point the son of Enops bled; 
(Satnius the brave, whom beauteous Neis bore 
Amidst her flocks on Satnioa__s silver shore;) 
Struck through the bellya__s rim, the warrior lies 
Supine, and shades eternal veil his eyes. 
An arduous battle rose around the dead; 
By turns the Greeks, by turns the Trojans bled. 
Fired with revenge, Polydamas drew near, 
And at Prothoenor shook the trembling spear; 
The driving javelin through his shoulder thrust, 
He sinks to earth, and grasps the bloody dust. 
a_oeLo thus (the victor cries) we rule the field, 
And thus their arms the race of Panthus wield: 
From this unerring hand there flies no dart 
But bathes its point within a Grecian heart. 
Proppa__d on that spear to which thou owest thy fall, 
Go, guide thy darksome steps to Plutoa__s dreary hall.a__ 
He said, and sorrow toucha__d each Argive breast: 
The soul of Ajax burna__d above the rest. 
As by his side the groaning warrior fell, 
At the fierce foe he launcha__d his piercing steel; 
The foe, reclining, shunna__d the flying death; 
But fate, Archilochus, demands thy breath: 
Thy lofty birth no succour could impart, 
The wings of death oa__ertook thee on the dart; 
Swift to perform heavena__s fatal will, it fled 
Full on the juncture of the neck and head, 
And took the joint, and cut the nerves in twain: 
The dropping head first tumbled on the plain. 
So just the stroke, that yet the body stood 
Erect, then rolla__d along the sands in blood. 
a_oeHere, proud Polydamas, here turn thy eyes! 
(The towering Ajax loud-insulting cries:) 
Say, is this chief extended on the plain 
A worthy vengeance for Prothoenor slain? 
[pg 266] 
Mark well his port! his figure and his face 
Nor speak him vulgar, nor of vulgar race; 
Some lines, methinks, may make his lineage known, 
Antenora__s brother, or perhaps his son.a__ 
He spake, and smiled severe, for well he knew 
The bleeding youth: Troy saddena__d at the view. 
But furious Acamas avenged his cause; 
As Promachus his slaughtered brother draws, 
He pierced his hearta_"a_oeSuch fate attends you all, 
Proud Argives! destined by our arms to fall. 
Not Troy alone, but haughty Greece, shall share 
The toils, the sorrows, and the wounds of war. 
Behold your Promachus deprived of breath, 
A victim owed to my brave brothera__s death. 
Not unappeased he enters Plutoa__s gate, 
Who leaves a brother to revenge his fate.a__ 
Heart-piercing anguish struck the Grecian host, 
But toucha__d the breast of bold Peneleus most; 
At the proud boaster he directs his course; 
The boaster flies, and shuns superior force. 
But young Ilioneus received the spear; 
Ilioneus, his fathera__s only care: 
(Phorbas the rich, of all the Trojan train 
Whom Hermes loved, and taught the arts of gain:) 
Full in his eye the weapon chanced to fall, 
And from the fibres scoopa__d the rooted ball, 
Drove through the neck, and hurla__d him to the plain; 
He lifts his miserable arms in vain! 
Swift his broad falchion fierce Peneleus spread, 
And from the spouting shoulders struck his head; 
To earth at once the head and helmet fly; 
The lance, yet sticking through the bleeding eye, 
The victor seized; and, as aloft he shook 
The gory visage, thus insulting spoke: 
a_oeTrojans! your great Ilioneus behold! 
Haste, to his father let the tale be told: 
Let his high roofs resound with frantic woe, 
Such as the house of Promachus must know; 
Let doleful tidings greet his mothera__s ear, 
Such as to Promachusa__ sad spouse we bear, 
When we victorious shall to Greece return, 
And the pale matron in our triumphs mourn.a__ 
Dreadful he spoke, then tossa__d the head on high; 
The Trojans hear, they tremble, and they fly: 
Aghast they gaze around the fleet and wall, 
And dread the ruin that impends on all. 
Daughters of Jove! that on Olympus shine, 
Ye all-beholding, all-recording nine! 
O say, when Neptune made proud Ilion yield, 
What chief, what hero first embrued the field? 
[pg 267] 
Of all the Grecians what immortal name, 
And whose blessa__d trophies, will ye raise to fame? 
Thou first, great Ajax! on the unsanguined plain 
Laid Hyrtius, leader of the Mysian train. 
Phalces and Mermer, Nestora__s son oa__erthrew, 
Bold Merion, Morys and Hippotion slew. 
Strong Periphaetes and Prothoon bled, 
By Teucera__s arrows mingled with the dead, 
Pierced in the flank by Menelausa__ steel, 
His peoplea__s pastor, Hyperenor fell; 
Eternal darkness wrappa__d the warrior round, 
And the fierce soul came rushing through the wound. 
But stretcha__d in heaps before Oileusa__ son, 
Fall mighty numbers, mighty numbers run; 
Ajax the less, of all the Grecian race 
Skilla__d in pursuit, and swiftest in the chase. 
Illustration: BACCHUS. 
BACCHUS. 
[pg 268] 
BOOK XV. 
ARGUMENT. 
THE FIFTH BATTLE AT THE SHIPS; AND THE ACTS OF AJAX. 
Jupiter, awaking, sees the Trojans repulsed from the trenches, Hector 
in a swoon, and Neptune at the head of the Greeks: he is highly 
incensed at the artifice of Juno, who appeases him by her submissions; 
she is then sent to Iris and Apollo. Juno, repairing to the assembly of 
the gods, attempts, with extraordinary address, to incense them against 
Jupiter; in particular she touches Mars with a violent resentment; he 
is ready to take arms, but is prevented by Minerva. Iris and Apollo 
obey the orders of Jupiter; Iris commands Neptune to leave the battle, 
to which, after much reluctance and passion, he consents. Apollo 
reinspires Hector with vigour, brings him back to the battle, marches 
before him with his aegis, and turns the fortune of the fight. He 
breaks down great part of the Grecian wall: the Trojans rush in, and 
attempt to fire the first line of the fleet, but are, as yet, repelled 
by the greater Ajax with a prodigious slaughter. 
Now in swift flight they pass the trench profound, 
And many a chief lay gasping on the ground: 
Then stoppa__d and panted, where the chariots lie 
Fear on their cheek, and horror in their eye. 
Meanwhile, awakena__d from his dream of love, 
On Idaa__s summit sat imperial Jove: 
Round the wide fields he cast a careful view, 
There saw the Trojans fly, the Greeks pursue; 
These proud in arms, those scattera__d oa__er the plain 
And, a__midst the war, the monarch of the main. 
Not far, great Hector on the dust he spies, 
(His sad associates round with weeping eyes,) 
Ejecting blood, and panting yet for breath, 
His senses wandering to the verge of death. 
The god beheld him with a pitying look, 
And thus, incensed, to fraudful Juno spoke: 
a_oeO thou, still adverse to the eternal will, 
For ever studious in promoting ill! 
Thy arts have made the godlike Hector yield, 
And driven his conquering squadrons from the field. 
Canst thou, unhappy in thy wiles, withstand 
Our power immense, and brave the almighty hand? 
[pg 269] 
Hast thou forgot, when, bound and fixa__d on high, 
From the vast concave of the spangled sky, 
I hung thee trembling in a golden chain, 
And all the raging gods opposed in vain? 
Headlong I hurla__d them from the Olympian hall, 
Stunna__d in the whirl, and breathless with the fall. 
For godlike Hercules these deeds were done, 
Nor seema__d the vengeance worthy such a son: 
When, by thy wiles induced, fierce Boreas tossa__d 
The shipwrecka__d hero on the Coan coast, 
Him through a thousand forms of death I bore, 
And sent to Argos, and his native shore. 
Hear this, remember, and our fury dread, 
Nor pull the unwilling vengeance on thy head; 
Lest arts and blandishments successless prove, 
Thy soft deceits, and well-dissembled love.a__ 
The Thunderer spoke: imperial Juno mourna__d, 
And, trembling, these submissive words returna__d: 
a_oeBy every oath that powers immortal ties, 
The foodful earth and all-infolding skies; 
By thy black waves, tremendous Styx! that flow 
Through the drear realms of gliding ghosts below; 
By the dread honours of thy sacred head, 
And that unbroken vow, our virgin bed! 
Not by my arts the ruler of the main 
Steeps Troy in blood, and ranges round the plain: 
By his own ardour, his own pity swaya__d, 
To help his Greeks, he fought and disobeya__d: 
Else had thy Juno better counsels given, 
And taught submission to the sire of heaven.a__ 
a_oeThinka__st thou with me? fair empress of the skies! 
(The immortal father with a smile replies;) 
Then soon the haughty sea-god shall obey, 
Nor dare to act but when we point the way. 
If truth inspires thy tongue, proclaim our will 
To yon bright synod on the Olympian hill; 
Our high decree let various Iris know, 
And call the god that bears the silver bow. 
Let her descend, and from the embattled plain 
Command the sea-god to his watery reign: 
While Phoebus hastes great Hector to prepare 
To rise afresh, and once more wake the war: 
His labouring bosom re-inspires with breath, 
And calls his senses from the verge of death. 
Greece chased by Troy, even to Achillesa__ fleet, 
Shall fall by thousands at the heroa__s feet. 
He, not untoucha__d with pity, to the plain 
Shall send Patroclus, but shall send in vain. 
What youths he slaughters under Iliona__s walls! 
Even my loved son, divine Sarpedon, falls! 
[pg 270] 
Vanquisha__d at last by Hectora__s lance he lies. 
Then, nor till then, shall great Achilles rise: 
And lo! that instant, godlike Hector dies. 
From that great hour the wara__s whole fortune turns, 
Pallas assists, and lofty Ilion burns. 
Not till that day shall Jove relax his rage, 
Nor one of all the heavenly host engage 
In aid of Greece. The promise of a god 
I gave, and seala__d it with the almighty nod, 
Achillesa__ glory to the stars to raise; 
Such was our word, and fate the word obeys.a__ 
The trembling queen (the almighty order given) 
Swift from the Idaean summit shot to heaven. 
As some wayfaring man, who wanders oa__er 
In thought a length of lands he trod before, 
Sends forth his active mind from place to place, 
Joins hill to dale, and measures space with space: 
So swift flew Juno to the blessa__d abodes, 
If thought of man can match the speed of gods. 
There sat the powers in awful synod placed; 
They bowa__d, and made obeisance as she passa__d 
Through all the brazen dome: with goblets crowna__d239 
They hail her queen; the nectar streams around. 
Fair Themis first presents the golden bowl, 
And anxious asks what cares disturb her soul? 
To whom the white-arma__d goddess thus replies: 
a_oeEnough thou knowa__st the tyrant of the skies, 
Severely bent his purpose to fulfil, 
Unmoved his mind, and unrestraina__d his will. 
Go thou, the feasts of heaven attend thy call; 
Bid the crowna__d nectar circle round the hall: 
But Jove shall thunder through the ethereal dome 
Such stern decrees, such threatena__d woes to come, 
As soon shall freeze mankind with dire surprise, 
And damp the eternal banquets of the skies.a__ 
The goddess said, and sullen took her place; 
Black horror saddena__d each celestial face. 
To see the gathering grudge in every breast, 
Smiles on her lips a spleenful joy expressa__d; 
While on her wrinkled front, and eyebrow bent, 
Sat stedfast care, and lowering discontent. 
Thus she proceedsa_"a_oeAttend, ye powers above! 
But know, a__tis madness to contest with Jove: 
Supreme he sits; and sees, in pride of sway. 
Your vassal godheads grudgingly obey: 
Fierce in the majesty of power controls; 
Shakes all the thrones of heaven, and bends the poles. 
Submiss, immortals! all he wills, obey: 
And thou, great Mars, begin and show the way. 
[pg 271] 
Behold Ascalaphus! behold him die, 
But dare not murmur, dare not vent a sigh; 
Thy own loved boasted offspring lies oa__erthrown, 
If that loved boasted offspring be thy own.a__ 
Stern Mars, with anguish for his slaughtera__d son, 
Smote his rebelling breast, and fierce begun: 
a_oeThus then, immortals! thus shall Mars obey; 
Forgive me, gods, and yield my vengeance way: 
Descending first to yon forbidden plain, 
The god of battles dares avenge the slain; 
Dares, though the thunder bursting oa__er my head 
Should hurl me blazing on those heaps of dead.a__ 
With that he gives command to Fear and Flight 
To join his rapid coursers for the fight: 
Then grim in arms, with hasty vengeance flies; 
Arms that reflect a radiance through the skies. 
And now had Jove, by bold rebellion driven, 
Discharged his wrath on half the host of heaven; 
But Pallas, springing through the bright abode, 
Starts from her azure throne to calm the god. 
Struck for the immortal race with timely fear, 
From frantic Mars she snatcha__d the shield and spear; 
Then the huge helmet lifting from his head, 
Thus to the impetuous homicide she said: 
a_oeBy what wild passion, furious! art thou tossa__d? 
Striva__st thou with Jove? thou art already lost. 
Shall not the Thunderera__s dread command restrain, 
And was imperial Juno heard in vain? 
Back to the skies wouldst thou with shame be driven, 
And in thy guilt involve the host of heaven? 
Ilion and Greece no more should Jove engage, 
The skies would yield an ampler scene of rage; 
Guilty and guiltless find an equal fate 
And one vast ruin whelm the Olympian state. 
Cease then thy offspringa__s death unjust to call; 
Heroes as great have died, and yet shall fall. 
Why should heavena__s law with foolish man comply 
Exempted from the race ordaina__d to die?a__ 
This menace fixa__d the warrior to his throne; 
Sullen he sat, and curba__d the rising groan. 
Then Juno calla__d (Jovea__s orders to obey) 
The winged Iris, and the god of day. 
a_oeGo wait the Thunderera__s will (Saturnia cried) 
On yon tall summit of the fountful Ide: 
There in the fathera__s awful presence stand, 
Receive, and execute his dread command.a__ 
She said, and sat; the god that gilds the day, 
And various Iris, wing their airy way. 
Swift as the wind, to Idaa__s hills they came, 
(Fair nurse of fountains, and of savage game) 
[pg 272] 
There sat the eternal; he whose nod controls 
The trembling world, and shakes the steady poles. 
Veila__d in a mist of fragrance him they found, 
With clouds of gold and purple circled round. 
Well-pleased the Thunderer saw their earnest care, 
And prompt obedience to the queen of air; 
Then (while a smile serenes his awful brow) 
Commands the goddess of the showery bow: 
a_oeIris! descend, and what we here ordain, 
Report to yon mad tyrant of the main. 
Bid him from fight to his own deeps repair, 
Or breathe from slaughter in the fields of air. 
If he refuse, then let him timely weigh 
Our elder birthright, and superior sway. 
How shall his rashness stand the dire alarms, 
If heavena__s omnipotence descend in arms? 
Strives he with me, by whom his power was given, 
And is there equal to the lord of heaven?a__ 
The all-mighty spoke; the goddess winga__d her flight 
To sacred Ilion from the Idaean height. 
Swift as the rattling hail, or fleecy snows, 
Drive through the skies, when Boreas fiercely blows; 
So from the clouds descending Iris falls, 
And to blue Neptune thus the goddess calls: 
a_oeAttend the mandate of the sire above! 
In me behold the messenger of Jove: 
He bids thee from forbidden wars repair 
To thine own deeps, or to the fields of air. 
This if refused, he bids thee timely weigh 
His elder birthright, and superior sway. 
How shall thy rashness stand the dire alarms 
If heavena__s omnipotence descend in arms? 
Striva__st thou with him by whom all power is given? 
And art thou equal to the lord of heaven?a__ 
a_oeWhat means the haughty sovereign of the skies? 
(The king of ocean thus, incensed, replies;) 
Rule as he will his portiona__d realms on high; 
No vassal god, nor of his train, am I. 
Three brother deities from Saturn came, 
And ancient Rhea, eartha__s immortal dame: 
Assigna__d by lot, our triple rule we know; 
Infernal Pluto sways the shades below; 
Oa__er the wide clouds, and oa__er the starry plain, 
Ethereal Jove extends his high domain; 
My court beneath the hoary waves I keep, 
And hush the roarings of the sacred deep; 
Olympus, and this earth, in common lie: 
What claim has here the tyrant of the sky? 
Far in the distant clouds let him control, 
And awe the younger brothers of the pole; 
[pg 273] 
There to his children his commands be given, 
The trembling, servile, second race of heaven.a__ 
a_oeAnd must I then (said she), O sire of floods! 
Bear this fierce answer to the king of gods? 
Correct it yet, and change thy rash intent; 
A noble mind disdains not to repent. 
To elder brothers guardian fiends are given, 
To scourge the wretch insulting them and heaven.a__ 
a_oeGreat is the profit (thus the god rejoina__d) 
When ministers are blest with prudent mind: 
Warna__d by thy words, to powerful Jove I yield, 
And quit, though angry, the contended field: 
Not but his threats with justice I disclaim, 
The same our honours, and our birth the same. 
If yet, forgetful of his promise given 
To Hermes, Pallas, and the queen of heaven, 
To favour Ilion, that perfidious place, 
He breaks his faith with half the ethereal race; 
Give him to know, unless the Grecian train 
Lay yon proud structures level with the plain, 
Howea__er the offence by other gods be passa__d, 
The wrath of Neptune shall for ever last.a__ 
Thus speaking, furious from the field he strode, 
And plunged into the bosom of the flood. 
The lord of thunders, from his lofty height 
Beheld, and thus bespoke the source of light: 
a_oeBehold! the god whose liquid arms are hurla__d 
Around the globe, whose earthquakes rock the world, 
Desists at length his rebel-war to wage, 
Seeks his own seas, and trembles at our rage; 
Else had my wrath, heavena__s thrones all shaking round, 
Burna__d to the bottom of his seas profound; 
And all the gods that round old Saturn dwell 
Had heard the thunders to the deeps of hell. 
Well was the crime, and well the vengeance spared; 
Even power immense had found such battle hard. 
Go thou, my son! the trembling Greeks alarm, 
Shake my broad aegis on thy active arm, 
Be godlike Hector thy peculiar care, 
Swell his bold heart, and urge his strength to war: 
Let Ilion conquer, till the Achaian train 
Fly to their ships and Hellespont again: 
Then Greece shall breathe from toils.a__ The godhead said; 
His will divine the son of Jove obeya__d. 
Not half so swift the sailing falcon flies, 
That drives a turtle through the liquid skies, 
As Phoebus, shooting from the Idaean brow, 
Glides down the mountain to the plain below. 
There Hector seated by the stream he sees, 
His sense returning with the coming breeze; 
[pg 274] 
Again his pulses beat, his spirits rise; 
Again his loved companions meet his eyes; 
Jove thinking of his pains, they passa__d away, 
To whom the god who gives the golden day: 
a_oeWhy sits great Hector from the field so far? 
What grief, what wound, withholds thee from the war?a__ 
The fainting hero, as the vision bright 
Stood shining oa__er him, half unseala__d his sight: 
a_oeWhat blest immortal, with commanding breath, 
Thus wakens Hector from the sleep of death? 
Has fame not told, how, while my trusty sword 
Bathed Greece in slaughter, and her battle gored, 
The mighty Ajax with a deadly blow 
Had almost sunk me to the shades below? 
Even yet, methinks, the gliding ghosts I spy, 
And hella__s black horrors swim before my eye.a__ 
To him Apollo: a_oeBe no more dismaya__d; 
See, and be strong! the Thunderer sends thee aid. 
Behold! thy Phoebus shall his arms employ, 
Phoebus, propitious still to thee and Troy. 
Inspire thy warriors then with manly force, 
And to the ships impel thy rapid horse: 
Even I will make thy fiery coursers way, 
And drive the Grecians headlong to the sea.a__ 
Thus to bold Hector spoke the son of Jove, 
And breathed immortal ardour from above. 
As when the pampera__d steed, with reins unbound, 
Breaks from his stall, and pours along the ground; 
With ample strokes he rushes to the flood, 
To bathe his sides, and cool his fiery blood; 
His head, now freed, he tosses to the skies; 
His mane dishevella__d oa__er his shoulders flies: 
He snuffs the females in the well-known plain, 
And springs, exulting, to his fields again: 
Urged by the voice divine, thus Hector flew, 
Full of the god; and all his hosts pursue. 
As when the force of men and dogs combined 
Invade the mountain goat, or branching hind; 
Far from the huntera__s rage secure they lie 
Close in the rock, (not fated yet to die) 
When lo! a lion shoots across the way! 
They fly: at once the chasers and the prey. 
So Greece, that late in conquering troops pursued, 
And marka__d their progress through the ranks in blood, 
Soon as they see the furious chief appear, 
Forget to vanquish, and consent to fear. 
Thoas with grief observed his dreadful course, 
Thoas, the bravest of the A_tolian force; 
Skilla__d to direct the javelina__s distant flight, 
And bold to combat in the standing fight, 
[pg 275] 
Not more in councils famed for solid sense, 
Than winning words and heavenly eloquence. 
a_oeGods! what portent (he cried) these eyes invades? 
Lo! Hector rises from the Stygian shades! 
We saw him, late, by thundering Ajax killa__d: 
What god restores him to the frighted field; 
And not content that half of Greece lie slain, 
Pours new destruction on her sons again? 
He comes not, Jove! without thy powerful will; 
Lo! still he lives, pursues, and conquers still! 
Yet hear my counsel, and his worst withstand: 
The Greeksa__ main body to the fleet command; 
But let the few whom brisker spirits warm, 
Stand the first onset, and provoke the storm. 
Thus point your arms; and when such foes appear, 
Fierce as he is, let Hector learn to fear.a__ 
The warrior spoke; the listening Greeks obey, 
Thickening their ranks, and form a deep array. 
Each Ajax, Teucer, Merion gave command, 
The valiant leader of the Cretan band; 
And Mars-like Meges: these the chiefs excite, 
Approach the foe, and meet the coming fight. 
Behind, unnumbera__d multitudes attend, 
To flank the navy, and the shores defend. 
Full on the front the pressing Trojans bear, 
And Hector first came towering to the war. 
Phoebus himself the rushing battle led; 
A veil of clouds involved his radiant head: 
High held before him, Jovea__s enormous shield 
Portentous shone, and shaded all the field; 
Vulcan to Jove the immortal gift consigna__d, 
To scatter hosts and terrify mankind, 
The Greeks expect the shock, the clamours rise 
From different parts, and mingle in the skies. 
Dire was the hiss of darts, by heroes flung, 
And arrows leaping from the bow-string sung; 
These drink the life of generous warriors slain: 
Those guiltless fall, and thirst for blood in vain. 
As long as Phoebus bore unmoved the shield, 
Sat doubtful conquest hovering oa__er the field; 
But when aloft he shakes it in the skies, 
Shouts in their ears, and lightens in their eyes, 
Deep horror seizes every Grecian breast, 
Their force is humbled, and their fear confessa__d. 
So flies a herd of oxen, scattera__d wide, 
No swain to guard them, and no day to guide, 
When two fell lions from the mountain come, 
And spread the carnage through the shady gloom. 
Impending Phoebus pours around them fear, 
And Troy and Hector thunder in the rear. 
[pg 276] 
Heaps fall on heaps: the slaughter Hector leads, 
First great Arcesilas, then Stichius bleeds; 
One to the bold Boeotians ever dear, 
And one Menestheusa__ friend and famed compeer. 
Medon and Iasus, A_neas sped; 
This sprang from Phelus, and the Athenians led; 
But hapless Medon from Oileus came; 
Him Ajax honoura__d with a brothera__s name, 
Though born of lawless love: from home expella__d, 
A banisha__d man, in Phylace he dwella__d, 
Pressa__d by the vengeance of an angry wife; 
Troy ends at last his labours and his life. 
Mecystes next Polydamas oa__erthrew; 
And thee, brave Clonius, great Agenor slew. 
By Paris, Deiochus inglorious dies, 
Pierced through the shoulder as he basely flies. 
Politesa__ arm laid Echius on the plain; 
Stretcha__d on one heap, the victors spoil the slain. 
The Greeks dismaya__d, confused, disperse or fall, 
Some seek the trench, some skulk behind the wall. 
While these fly trembling, others pant for breath, 
And oa__er the slaughter stalks gigantic death. 
On rusha__d bold Hector, gloomy as the night; 
Forbids to plunder, animates the fight, 
Points to the fleet: a_oeFor, by the gods! who flies,240 
Who dares but linger, by this hand he dies; 
No weeping sister his cold eye shall close, 
No friendly hand his funeral pyre compose. 
Who stops to plunder at this signal hour, 
The birds shall tear him, and the dogs devour.a__ 
Furious he said; the smarting scourge resounds; 
The coursers fly; the smoking chariot bounds; 
The hosts rush on; loud clamours shake the shore; 
The horses thunder, earth and ocean roar! 
Apollo, planted at the trencha__s bound, 
Pusha__d at the bank: down sank the enormous mound: 
Rolla__d in the ditch the heapy ruin lay; 
A sudden road! a long and ample way. 
Oa__er the dread fosse (a late impervious space) 
Now steeds, and men, and cars tumultuous pass. 
The wondering crowds the downward level trod; 
Before them flamed the shield, and marcha__d the god. 
Then with his hand he shook the mighty wall; 
[pg 277] 
And lo! the turrets nod, the bulwarks fall: 
Easy as when ashore an infant stands, 
And draws imagined houses in the sands; 
The sportive wanton, pleased with some new play, 
Sweeps the slight works and fashiona__d domes away: 
Thus vanisha__d at thy touch, the towers and walls; 
The toil of thousands in a moment falls. 
The Grecians gaze around with wild despair, 
Confused, and weary all the powers with prayer: 
Exhort their men, with praises, threats, commands; 
And urge the gods, with voices, eyes, and hands. 
Experienced Nestor chief obtests the skies, 
And weeps his country with a fathera__s eyes. 
a_oeO Jove! if ever, on his native shore, 
One Greek enricha__d thy shrine with offera__d gore; 
If ea__er, in hope our country to behold, 
We paid the fattest firstlings of the fold; 
If ea__er thou signa__st our wishes with thy nod: 
Perform the promise of a gracious god! 
This day preserve our navies from the flame, 
And save the relics of the Grecian name.a__ 
Thus prayed the sage: the eternal gave consent, 
And peals of thunder shook the firmament. 
Presumptuous Troy mistook the accepting sign, 
And catcha__d new fury at the voice divine. 
As, when black tempests mix the seas and skies, 
The roaring deeps in watery mountains rise, 
Above the sides of some tall ship ascend, 
Its womb they deluge, and its ribs they rend: 
Thus loudly roaring, and oa__erpowering all, 
Mount the thick Trojans up the Grecian wall; 
Legions on legions from each side arise: 
Thick sound the keels; the storm of arrows flies. 
Fierce on the ships above, the cars below, 
These wield the mace, and those the javelin throw. 
While thus the thunder of the battle raged, 
And labouring armies round the works engaged, 
Still in the tent Patroclus sat to tend 
The good Eurypylus, his wounded friend. 
He sprinkles healing balms, to anguish kind, 
And adds discourse, the medicine of the mind. 
But when he saw, ascending up the fleet, 
Victorious Troy; then, starting from his seat, 
With bitter groans his sorrows he expressa__d, 
He wrings his hands, he beats his manly breast. 
a_oeThough yet thy state require redress (he cries) 
Depart I must: what horrors strike my eyes! 
Charged with Achillesa__ high command I go, 
A mournful witness of this scene of woe; 
I haste to urge him by his countrya__s care 
[pg 278] 
To rise in arms, and shine again in war. 
Perhaps some favouring god his soul may bend; 
The voice is powerful of a faithful friend.a__ 
He spoke; and, speaking, swifter than the wind 
Sprung from the tent, and left the war behind. 
The embodied Greeks the fierce attack sustain, 
But strive, though numerous, to repulse in vain: 
Nor could the Trojans, through that firm array, 
Force to the fleet and tents the impervious way. 
As when a shipwright, with Palladian art, 
Smooths the rough wood, and levels every part; 
With equal hand he guides his whole design, 
By the just rule, and the directing line: 
The martial leaders, with like skill and care, 
Preserved their line, and equal kept the war. 
Brave deeds of arms through all the ranks were tried, 
And every ship sustained an equal tide. 
At one proud bark, high-towering oa__er the fleet, 
Ajax the great, and godlike Hector meet; 
For one bright prize the matchless chiefs contend, 
Nor this the ships can fire, nor that defend: 
One kept the shore, and one the vessel trod; 
That fixa__d as fate, this acted by a god. 
The son of Clytius in his daring hand, 
The deck approaching, shakes a flaming brand; 
But, pierced by Telamona__s huge lance, expires: 
Thundering he falls, and drops the extinguisha__d fires. 
Great Hector viewa__d him with a sad survey, 
As stretcha__d in dust before the stern he lay. 
a_oeOh! all of Trojan, all of Lycian race! 
Stand to your arms, maintain this arduous space: 
Lo! where the son of royal Clytius lies; 
Ah, save his arms, secure his obsequies!a__ 
This said, his eager javelin sought the foe: 
But Ajax shunna__d the meditated blow. 
Not vainly yet the forceful lance was thrown; 
It stretcha__d in dust unhappy Lycophron: 
An exile long, sustaina__d at Ajaxa__ board, 
A faithful servant to a foreign lord; 
In peace, and war, for ever at his side, 
Near his loved master, as he lived, he died. 
From the high poop he tumbles on the sand, 
And lies a lifeless load along the land. 
With anguish Ajax views the piercing sight, 
And thus inflames his brother to the fight: 
a_oeTeucer, behold! extended on the shore 
Our friend, our loved companion! now no more! 
Dear as a parent, with a parenta__s care 
To fight our wars he left his native air. 
This death deplored, to Hectora__s rage we owe; 
[pg 279] 
Revenge, revenge it on the cruel foe. 
Where are those darts on which the fates attend? 
And where the bow which Phoebus taught to bend?a__ 
Impatient Teucer, hastening to his aid, 
Before the chief his ample bow displaya__d; 
The well-stored quiver on his shoulders hung: 
Then hissa__d his arrow, and the bowstring sung. 
Clytus, Pisenora__s son, renowna__d in fame, 
(To thee, Polydamas! an honoura__d name) 
Drove through the thickest of the embattled plains 
The startling steeds, and shook his eager reins. 
As all on glory ran his ardent mind, 
The pointed death arrests him from behind: 
Through his fair neck the thrilling arrow flies; 
In youtha__s first bloom reluctantly he dies. 
Hurla__d from the lofty seat, at distance far, 
The headlong coursers spurn his empty car; 
Till sad Polydamas the steeds restraina__d, 
And gave, Astynous, to thy careful hand; 
Then, fired to vengeance, rusha__d amidst the foe: 
Rage edged his sword, and strengthena__d every blow. 
Once more bold Teucer, in his countrya__s cause, 
At Hectora__s breast a chosen arrow draws: 
And had the weapon found the destined way, 
Thy fall, great Trojan! had renowna__d that day. 
But Hector was not dooma__d to perish then: 
The all-wise disposer of the fates of men 
(Imperial Jove) his present death withstands; 
Nor was such glory due to Teucera__s hands. 
At its full stretch as the tough string he drew, 
Struck by an arm unseen, it burst in two; 
Down droppa__d the bow: the shaft with brazen head 
Fell innocent, and on the dust lay dead. 
The astonisha__d archer to great Ajax cries; 
a_oeSome god prevents our destined enterprise: 
Some god, propitious to the Trojan foe, 
Has, from my arm unfailing, struck the bow, 
And broke the nerve my hands had twined with art, 
Strong to impel the flight of many a dart.a__ 
a_oeSince heaven commands it (Ajax made reply) 
Dismiss the bow, and lay thy arrows by: 
Thy arms no less suffice the lance to wield, 
And quit the quiver for the ponderous shield. 
In the first ranks indulge thy thirst of fame, 
Thy brave example shall the rest inflame. 
Fierce as they are, by long successes vain; 
To force our fleet, or even a ship to gain, 
Asks toil, and sweat, and blood: their utmost might 
Shall find its matcha_"No more: a__tis ours to fight.a__ 
Then Teucer laid his faithless bow aside; 
[pg 280] 
The fourfold buckler oa__er his shoulder tied; 
On his brave head a crested helm he placed, 
With nodding horse-hair formidably graced; 
A dart, whose point with brass refulgent shines, 
The warrior wields; and his great brother joins. 
This Hector saw, and thus expressa__d his joy: 
a_oeYe troops of Lycia, Dardanus, and Troy! 
Be mindful of yourselves, your ancient fame, 
And spread your glory with the navya__s flame. 
Jove is with us; I saw his hand, but now, 
From the proud archer strike his vaunted bow: 
Indulgent Jove! how plain thy favours shine, 
When happy nations bear the marks divine! 
How easy then, to see the sinking state 
Of realms accursed, deserted, reprobate! 
Such is the fate of Greece, and such is ours: 
Behold, ye warriors, and exert your powers. 
Death is the worst; a fate which all must try; 
And for our country, a__tis a bliss to die. 
The gallant man, though slain in fight he be, 
Yet leaves his nation safe, his children free; 
Entails a debt on all the grateful state; 
His own brave friends shall glory in his fate; 
His wife live honoura__d, all his race succeed, 
And late posterity enjoy the deed!a__ 
This roused the soul in every Trojan breast: 
The godlike Ajax next his Greeks addressa__d: 
a_oeHow long, ye warriors of the Argive race, 
(To generous Argos what a dire disgrace!) 
How long on these cursed confines will ye lie, 
Yet undetermined, or to live or die? 
What hopes remain, what methods to retire, 
If once your vessels catch the Trojan fire? 
Make how the flames approach, how near they fall, 
How Hector calls, and Troy obeys his call! 
Not to the dance that dreadful voice invites, 
It calls to death, and all the rage of fights. 
a__Tis now no time for wisdom or debates; 
To your own hands are trusted all your fates; 
And better far in one decisive strife, 
One day should end our labour or our life, 
Than keep this hard-got inch of barren sands, 
Still pressa__d, and pressa__d by such inglorious hands.a__ 
The listening Grecians feel their leadera__s flame, 
And every kindling bosom pants for fame. 
Then mutual slaughters spread on either side; 
By Hector here the Phocian Schedius died; 
There, pierced by Ajax, sunk Laodamas, 
Chief of the foot, of old Antenora__s race. 
Polydamas laid Otus on the sand, 
[pg 281] 
The fierce commander of the Epeian band. 
His lance bold Meges at the victor threw; 
The victor, stooping, from the death withdrew; 
(That valued life, O Phoebus! was thy care) 
But Croesmusa__ bosom took the flying spear: 
His corpse fell bleeding on the slippery shore; 
His radiant arms triumphant Meges bore. 
Dolops, the son of Lampus, rushes on, 
Sprung from the race of old Laomedon, 
And famed for prowess in a well-fought field, 
He pierced the centre of his sounding shield: 
But Meges, Phyleusa__ ample breastplate wore, 
(Well-known in fight on Sellea__s winding shore; 
For king Euphetes gave the golden mail, 
Compact, and firm with many a jointed scale) 
Which oft, in cities storma__d, and battles won, 
Had saved the father, and now saves the son. 
Full at the Trojana__s head he urged his lance, 
Where the high plumes above the helmet dance, 
New tinga__d with Tyrian dye: in dust below, 
Shorn from the crest, the purple honours glow. 
Meantime their fight the Spartan king surveya__d, 
And stood by Megesa__ side a sudden aid. 
Through Dolopsa__ shoulder urged his forceful dart, 
Which held its passage through the panting heart, 
And issued at his breast. With thundering sound 
The warrior falls, extended on the ground. 
In rush the conquering Greeks to spoil the slain: 
But Hectora__s voice excites his kindred train; 
The hero most, from Hicetaon sprung, 
Fierce Melanippus, gallant, brave, and young. 
He (ere to Troy the Grecians crossa__d the main) 
Fed his large oxen on Percotea__s plain; 
But when oppressa__d, his country claima__d his care, 
Returna__d to Ilion, and excella__d in war; 
For this, in Priama__s court, he held his place, 
Beloved no less than Priama__s royal race. 
Him Hector singled, as his troops he led, 
And thus inflamed him, pointing to the dead. 
a_oeLo, Melanippus! lo, where Dolops lies; 
And is it thus our royal kinsman dies? 
Oa__ermatcha__d he falls; to two at once a prey, 
And lo! they bear the bloody arms away! 
Come ona_"a distant war no longer wage, 
But hand to hand thy countrya__s foes engage: 
Till Greece at once, and all her glory end; 
Or Ilion from her towery height descend, 
Heaved from the lowest stone; and bury all 
In one sad sepulchre, one common fall.a__ 
Hector (this said) rusha__d forward on the foes: 
[pg 282] 
With equal ardour Melanippus glows: 
Then Ajax thusa_"a_oeO Greeks! respect your fame, 
Respect yourselves, and learn an honest shame: 
Let mutual reverence mutual warmth inspire, 
And catch from breast to breast the noble fire, 
On valoura__s side the odds of combat lie; 
The brave live glorious, or lamented die; 
The wretch that trembles in the field of fame, 
Meets death, and worse than death, eternal shame.a__ 
His generous sense he not in vain imparts; 
It sunk, and rooted in the Grecian hearts: 
They join, they throng, they thicken at his call, 
And flank the navy with a brazen wall; 
Shields touching shields, in order blaze above, 
And stop the Trojans, though impella__d by Jove. 
The fiery Spartan first, with loud applause. 
Warms the bold son of Nestor in his cause. 
a_oeIs there (he said) in arms a youth like you, 
So strong to fight, so active to pursue? 
Why stand you distant, nor attempt a deed? 
Lift the bold lance, and make some Trojan bleed.a__ 
He said; and backward to the lines retired; 
Forth rusha__d the youth with martial fury fired, 
Beyond the foremost ranks; his lance he threw, 
And round the black battalions cast his view. 
The troops of Troy recede with sudden fear, 
While the swift javelin hissa__d along in air. 
Advancing Melanippus met the dart 
With his bold breast, and felt it in his heart: 
Thundering he falls; his falling arms resound, 
And his broad buckler rings against the ground. 
The victor leaps upon his prostrate prize: 
Thus on a roe the well-breatha__d beagle flies, 
And rends his side, fresh-bleeding with the dart 
The distant hunter sent into his heart. 
Observing Hector to the rescue flew; 
Bold as he was, Antilochus withdrew. 
So when a savage, ranging oa__er the plain, 
Has torn the shepherda__s dog, or shepherda__s swain, 
While conscious of the deed, he glares around, 
And hears the gathering multitude resound, 
Timely he flies the yet-untasted food, 
And gains the friendly shelter of the wood: 
So fears the youth; all Troy with shouts pursue, 
While stones and darts in mingled tempest flew; 
But entera__d in the Grecian ranks, he turns 
His manly breast, and with new fury burns. 
Now on the fleet the tides of Trojans drove, 
Fierce to fulfil the stern decrees of Jove: 
The sire of gods, confirming Thetisa__ prayer, 
[pg 283] 
The Grecian ardour quencha__d in deep despair; 
But lifts to glory Troya__s prevailing bands, 
Swells all their hearts, and strengthens all their hands. 
On Idaa__s top he waits with longing eyes, 
To view the navy blazing to the skies; 
Then, nor till then, the scale of war shall turn, 
The Trojans fly, and conquera__d Ilion burn. 
These fates revolved in his almighty mind, 
He raises Hector to the work designa__d, 
Bids him with more than mortal fury glow, 
And drives him, like a lightning, on the foe. 
So Mars, when human crimes for vengeance call, 
Shakes his huge javelin, and whole armies fall. 
Not with more rage a conflagration rolls, 
Wraps the vast mountains, and involves the poles. 
He foams with wrath; beneath his gloomy brow 
Like fiery meteors his red eye-balls glow: 
The radiant helmet on his temple burns, 
Waves when he nods, and lightens as he turns: 
For Jove his splendour round the chief had thrown, 
And cast the blaze of both the hosts on one. 
Unhappy glories! for his fate was near, 
Due to stern Pallas, and Pelidesa__ spear: 
Yet Jove deferra__d the death he was to pay, 
And gave what fate allowa__d, the honours of a day! 
Now all on fire for fame, his breast, his eyes 
Burn at each foe, and single every prize; 
Still at the closest ranks, the thickest fight, 
He points his ardour, and exerts his might. 
The Grecian phalanx, moveless as a tower, 
On all sides battera__d, yet resists his power: 
So some tall rock oa__erhangs the hoary main,241 
By winds assaila__d, by billows beat in vain, 
Unmoved it hears, above, the tempest blow, 
And sees the watery mountains break below. 
Girt in surrounding flames, he seems to fall 
Like fire from Jove, and bursts upon them all: 
Bursts as a wave that from the cloud impends, 
And, swella__d with tempests, on the ship descends; 
White are the decks with foam; the winds aloud 
Howl oa__er the masts, and sing through every shroud: 
Pale, trembling, tired, the sailors freeze with fears; 
And instant death on every wave appears. 
So pale the Greeks the eyes of Hector meet, 
The chief so thunders, and so shakes the fleet. 
[pg 284] 
As when a lion, rushing from his den, 
Amidst the plain of some wide-watera__d fen, 
(Where numerous oxen, as at ease they feed, 
At large expatiate oa__er the ranker mead) 
Leaps on the herds before the herdsmana__s eyes; 
The trembling herdsman far to distance flies; 
Some lordly bull (the rest dispersed and fled) 
He singles out; arrests, and lays him dead. 
Thus from the rage of Jove-like Hector flew 
All Greece in heaps; but one he seized, and slew: 
Mycenian Periphes, a mighty name, 
In wisdom great, in arms well known to fame; 
The minister of stern Eurystheusa__ ire 
Against Alcides, Copreus was his sire: 
The son redeema__d the honours of the race, 
A son as generous as the sire was base; 
Oa__er all his countrya__s youth conspicuous far 
In every virtue, or of peace or war: 
But dooma__d to Hectora__s stronger force to yield! 
Against the margin of his ample shield 
He struck his hasty foot: his heels up-sprung; 
Supine he fell; his brazen helmet rung. 
On the fallen chief the invading Trojan pressa__d, 
And plunged the pointed javelin in his breast. 
His circling friends, who strove to guard too late 
The unhappy hero, fled, or shared his fate. 
Chased from the foremost line, the Grecian train 
Now man the next, receding toward the main: 
Wedged in one body at the tents they stand, 
Walla__d round with sterns, a gloomy, desperate band. 
Now manly shame forbids the inglorious flight; 
Now fear itself confines them to the fight: 
Man courage breathes in man; but Nestor most 
(The sage preserver of the Grecian host) 
Exhorts, adjures, to guard these utmost shores; 
And by their parents, by themselves implores. 
a_oeOh friends! be men: your generous breasts inflame 
With mutual honour, and with mutual shame! 
Think of your hopes, your fortunes; all the care 
Your wives, your infants, and your parents share: 
Think of each living fathera__s reverend head; 
Think of each ancestor with glory dead; 
Absent, by me they speak, by me they sue, 
They ask their safety, and their fame, from you: 
The gods their fates on this one action lay, 
And all are lost, if you desert the day.a__ 
He spoke, and round him breathed heroic fires; 
Minerva seconds what the sage inspires. 
The mist of darkness Jove around them threw 
She cleara__d, restoring all the war to view; 
[pg 285] 
A sudden ray shot beaming oa__er the plain, 
And showa__d the shores, the navy, and the main: 
Hector they saw, and all who fly, or fight, 
The scene wide-opening to the blaze of light, 
First of the field great Ajax strikes their eyes, 
His port majestic, and his ample size: 
A ponderous mace with studs of iron crowna__d, 
Full twenty cubits long, he swings around; 
Nor fights, like others, fixa__d to certain stands 
But looks a moving tower above the bands; 
High on the decks with vast gigantic stride, 
The godlike hero stalks from side to side. 
So when a horseman from the watery mead 
(Skilla__d in the manage of the bounding steed) 
Drives four fair coursers, practised to obey, 
To some great city through the public way; 
Safe in his art, as side by side they run, 
He shifts his seat, and vaults from one to one; 
And now to this, and now to that he flies; 
Admiring numbers follow with their eyes. 
From ship to ship thus Ajax swiftly flew, 
No less the wonder of the warring crew. 
As furious, Hector thundera__d threats aloud, 
And rusha__d enraged before the Trojan crowd; 
Then swift invades the ships, whose beaky prores 
Lay ranka__d contiguous on the bending shores; 
So the strong eagle from his airy height, 
Who marks the swansa__ or cranesa__ embodied flight, 
Stoops down impetuous, while they light for food, 
And, stooping, darkens with his wings the flood. 
Jove leads him on with his almighty hand, 
And breathes fierce spirits in his following band. 
The warring nations meet, the battle roars, 
Thick beats the combat on the sounding prores. 
Thou wouldst have thought, so furious was their fire, 
No force could tame them, and no toil could tire; 
As if new vigour from new fights they won, 
And the long battle was but then begun. 
Greece, yet unconquera__d, kept alive the war, 
Secure of death, confiding in despair: 
Troy in proud hopes already viewa__d the main 
Bright with the blaze, and red with heroes slain: 
Like strength is felt from hope, and from despair, 
And each contends, as his were all the war. 
a__Twas thou, bold Hector! whose resistless hand 
First seized a ship on that contested strand; 
[pg 286] 
The same which dead Protesilaus bore,242 
The first that toucha__d the unhappy Trojan shore: 
For this in arms the warring nations stood, 
And bathed their generous breasts with mutual blood. 
No room to poise the lance or bend the bow; 
But hand to hand, and man to man, they grow: 
Wounded, they wound; and seek each othera__s hearts 
With falchions, axes, swords, and shortena__d darts. 
The falchions ring, shields rattle, axes sound, 
Swords flash in air, or glitter on the ground; 
With streaming blood the slippery shores are dyed, 
And slaughtera__d heroes swell the dreadful tide. 
Still raging, Hector with his ample hand 
Grasps the high stern, and gives this loud command: 
Illustration: AJAX DEFENDING THE GREEK SHIPS. 
AJAX DEFENDING THE GREEK SHIPS. 
a_oeHaste, bring the flames! that toil of ten long years 
Is finished; and the day desired appears! 
This happy day with acclamations greet, 
Bright with destruction of yon hostile fleet. 
The coward-counsels of a timorous throng 
Of reverend dotards checka__d our glory long: 
Too long Jove lulla__d us with lethargic charms, 
But now in peals of thunder calls to arms: 
In this great day he crowns our full desires, 
Wakes all our force, and seconds all our fires.a__ 
He spokea_"the warriors at his fierce command 
Pour a new deluge on the Grecian band. 
Even Ajax paused, (so thick the javelins fly,) 
Steppa__d back, and doubted or to live or die. 
Yet, where the oars are placed, he stands to wait 
What chief approaching dares attempt his fate: 
[pg 287] 
Even to the last his naval charge defends, 
Now shakes his spear, now lifts, and now protends; 
Even yet, the Greeks with piercing shouts inspires, 
Amidst attacks, and deaths, and darts, and fires. 
a_oeO friends! O heroes! names for ever dear, 
Once sons of Mars, and thunderbolts of war! 
Ah! yet be mindful of your old renown, 
Your great forefathersa__ virtues and your own. 
What aids expect you in this utmost strait? 
What bulwarks rising between you and fate? 
No aids, no bulwarks your retreat attend, 
No friends to help, no city to defend. 
This spot is all you have, to lose or keep; 
There stand the Trojans, and here rolls the deep. 
a__Tis hostile ground you tread; your native lands 
Far, far from hence: your fates are in your hands.a__ 
Raging he spoke; nor further wastes his breath, 
But turns his javelin to the work of death. 
Whatea__er bold Trojan arma__d his daring hands, 
Against the sable ships, with flaming brands, 
So well the chief his naval weapon sped, 
The luckless warrior at his stern lay dead: 
Full twelve, the boldest, in a moment fell, 
Sent by great Ajax to the shades of hell. 
Illustration: CASTOR AND POLLUX. 
CASTOR AND POLLUX. 
[pg 288] 
BOOK XVI. 
ARGUMENT 
THE SIXTH BATTLE, THE ACTS AND DEATH OF PATROCLUS 
Patroclus (in pursuance of the request of Nestor in the eleventh book) 
entreats Achilles to suffer him to go to the assistance of the Greeks 
with Achillesa__ troops and armour. He agrees to it, but at the same time 
charges him to content himself with rescuing the fleet, without further 
pursuit of the enemy. The armour, horses, soldiers, and officers are 
described. Achilles offers a libation for the success of his friend, 
after which Patroclus leads the Myrmidons to battle. The Trojans, at 
the sight of Patroclus in Achillesa__ armour, taking him for that hero, 
are cast into the uttermost consternation; he beats them off from the 
vessels, Hector himself flies, Sarpedon is killed, though Jupiter was 
averse to his fate. Several other particulars of the battle are 
described; in the heat of which, Patroclus, neglecting the orders of 
Achilles, pursues the foe to the walls of Troy, where Apollo repulses 
and disarms him, Euphorbus wounds him, and Hector kills him, which 
concludes the book. 
So warra__d both armies on the ensanguined shore, 
While the black vessels smoked with human gore. 
Meantime Patroclus to Achilles flies; 
The streaming tears fall copious from his eyes 
Not faster, trickling to the plains below, 
From the tall rock the sable waters flow. 
Divine Pelides, with compassion moved. 
Thus spoke, indulgent, to his best beloved:243 
[pg 289] 
a_oePatroclus, say, what grief thy bosom bears, 
That flows so fast in these unmanly tears? 
No girl, no infant whom the mother keeps 
From her loved breast, with fonder passion weeps; 
Not more the mothera__s soul, that infant warms, 
Clung to her knees, and reaching at her arms, 
Than thou hast mine! Oh tell me, to what end 
Thy melting sorrows thus pursue thy friend? 
a_oeGrieva__st thou for me, or for, my martial band? 
Or come sad tidings from our native land? 
Our fathers live (our first, most tender care), 
Thy good Menoetius breathes the vital air, 
And hoary Peleus yet extends his days; 
Pleased in their age to hear their childrena__s praise. 
Or may some meaner cause thy pity claim? 
Perhaps yon relics of the Grecian name, 
Dooma__d in their ships to sink by fire and sword, 
And pay the forfeit of their haughty lord? 
Whatea__er the cause, reveal thy secret care, 
And speak those sorrows which a friend would share.a__ 
A sigh that instant from his bosom broke, 
Another followa__d, and Patroclus spoke: 
a_oeLet Greece at length with pity touch thy breast, 
Thyself a Greek; and, once, of Greeks the best! 
Lo! every chief that might her fate prevent, 
Lies pierced with wounds, and bleeding in his tent: 
Eurypylus, Tydides, Atreusa__ son, 
And wise Ulysses, at the navy groan, 
More for their countrya__s wounds than for their own. 
Their pain soft arts of pharmacy can ease, 
Thy breast alone no lenitives appease. 
May never rage like thine my soul enslave, 
O great in vain! unprofitably brave! 
Thy country slighted in her last distress, 
What friend, what man, from thee shall hope redress? 
Noa_"men unborn, and ages yet behind, 
Shall curse that fierce, that unforgiving mind. 
a_oeO man unpitying! if of man thy race; 
But sure thou springa__st not from a soft embrace, 
Nor ever amorous hero caused thy birth, 
Nor ever tender goddess brought thee forth: 
Some rugged rocka__s hard entrails gave thee form, 
And raging seas produced thee in a storm, 
A soul well suiting that tempestuous kind, 
So rough thy manners, so untamed thy mind. 
[pg 290] 
a_oeIf some dire oracle thy breast alarm, 
If aught from Jove, or Thetis, stop thy arm, 
Some beam of comfort yet on Greece may shine, 
If I but lead the Myrmidonian line: 
Clad in thy dreadful arms if I appear, 
Proud Troy shall tremble, and desert the war; 
Without thy person Greece shall win the day, 
And thy mere image chase her foes away. 
Pressa__d by fresh forces, her oa__erlaboura__d train 
Shall quit the ships, and Greece respire again.a__ 
Thus, blind to fate! with supplicating breath, 
Thou begga__st his arms, and in his arms thy death. 
Unfortunately good! a boding sigh 
Thy friend returna__d; and with it, this reply: 
a_oePatroclus! thy Achilles knows no fears; 
Nor words from Jove nor oracles he hears; 
Nor aught a mothera__s caution can suggest; 
The tyranta__s pride lies rooted in my breast. 
My wrongs, my wrongs, my constant thought engage, 
Those, my sole oracles, inspire my rage: 
I made him tyrant: gave him power to wrong 
Even my: I felt it; and shall feel it long. 
The maid, my black-eyed maid, he forced away, 
Due to the toils of many a well-fought day; 
Due to my conquest of her fathera__s reign; 
Due to the votes of all the Grecian train. 
From me he forced her; me, the bold and brave, 
Disgraced, dishonoura__d, like the meanest slave. 
But bear we thisa_"the wrongs I grieve are past; 
a__Tis time our fury should relent at last: 
I fixa__d its date; the day I wisha__d appears: 
How Hector to my ships his battle bears, 
The flames my eyes, the shouts invade my ears. 
Go then, Patroclus! court fair honoura__s charms 
In Troya__s famed fields, and in Achillesa__ arms: 
Lead forth my martial Myrmidons to fight, 
Go save the fleets, and conquer in my right. 
See the thin relics of their baffled band 
At the last edge of yon deserted land! 
Behold all Ilion on their ships descends; 
How the cloud blackens, how the storm impends! 
It was not thus, when, at my sight amazed, 
Troy saw and trembled, as this helmet blazed: 
Had not the injurious king our friendship lost, 
Yon ample trench had buried half her host. 
No camps, no bulwarks now the Trojans fear, 
Those are not dreadful, no Achilles there; 
No longer flames the lance of Tydeusa__ son; 
No more your general calls his heroes on: 
Hector, alone, I hear; his dreadful breath 
[pg 291] 
Commands your slaughter, or proclaims your death. 
Yet now, Patroclus, issue to the plain: 
Now save the ships, the rising fires restrain, 
And give the Greeks to visit Greece again. 
But heed my words, and mark a frienda__s command, 
Who trusts his fame and honours in thy hand, 
And from thy deeds expects the Achaian host 
Shall render back the beauteous maid he lost: 
Rage uncontrolla__d through all the hostile crew, 
But touch not Hector, Hector is my due. 
Though Jove in thunder should command the war, 
Be just, consult my glory, and forbear. 
The fleet once saved, desist from further chase, 
Nor lead to Iliona__s walls the Grecian race; 
Some adverse god thy rashness may destroy; 
Some god, like Phoebus, ever kind to Troy. 
Let Greece, redeema__d from this destructive strait, 
Do her own work; and leave the rest to fate. 
O! would to all the immortal powers above, 
Apollo, Pallas, and almighty Jove! 
That not one Trojan might be left alive, 
And not a Greek of all the race survive: 
Might only we the vast destruction shun, 
And only we destroy the accursed town!a__ 
Such conference held the chiefs; while on the strand 
Great Jove with conquest crowna__d the Trojan band. 
Ajax no more the sounding storm sustaina__d, 
So thick the darts an iron tempest raina__d: 
On his tired arm the weighty buckler hung; 
His hollow helm with falling javelins rung; 
His breath, in quick short pantings, comes and goes; 
And painful sweat from all his members flows. 
Spent and oa__erpowera__d, he barely breathes at most; 
Yet scarce an army stirs him from his post; 
Dangers on dangers all around him glow, 
And toil to toil, and woe succeeds to woe. 
Say, Muses, throned above the starry frame, 
How first the navy blazed with Trojan flame? 
Stern Hector waved his sword, and standing near, 
Where furious Ajax plied his ashen spear, 
Full on the lance a stroke so justly sped, 
That the broad falchion loppa__d its brazen head; 
His pointless spear the warrior shakes in vain; 
The brazen head falls sounding on the plain. 
Great Ajax saw, and owna__d the hand divine; 
Confessing Jove, and trembling at the sign, 
Warna__d he retreats. Then swift from all sides pour 
The hissing brands; thick streams the fiery shower; 
Oa__er the high stern the curling volumes rise, 
And sheets of rolling smoke involve the skies. 
[pg 292] 
Divine Achilles viewa__d the rising flames, 
And smote his thigh, and thus aloud exclaims: 
a_oeArm, arm, Patroclus! Lo, the blaze aspires! 
The glowing ocean reddens with the fires. 
Arm, ere our vessels catch the spreading flame; 
Arm, ere the Grecians be no more a name; 
I haste to bring the troops.a__a_"The hero said; 
The friend with ardour and with joy obeya__d. 
He cased his limbs in brass; and first around 
His manly legs, with silver buckles bound 
The clasping greaves; then to his breast applies 
The flaming cuirass of a thousand dyes; 
Emblazed with studs of gold his falchion shone 
In the rich belt, as in a starry zone: 
Achillesa__ shield his ample shoulders spread, 
Achillesa__ helmet nodded oa__er his head: 
Adorna__d in all his terrible array, 
He flasha__d around intolerable day. 
Alone untoucha__d, Pelidesa__ javelin stands, 
Not to be poised but by Pelidesa__ hands: 
From Peliona__s shady brow the plant entire 
Old Chiron rent, and shaped it for his sire; 
Whose sona__s great arm alone the weapon wields, 
The death of heroes, and the dread of fields. 
Illustration: Buckles. 
Buckles. 
The brave Automedon (an honoura__d name, 
The second to his lord in love and fame, 
In peace his friend, and partner of the war) 
The winged coursers harnessa__d to the car; 
Xanthus and Balius, of immortal breed, 
Sprung from the wind, and like the wind in speed. 
Whom the winga__d harpy, swift Podarge, bore, 
By Zephyr pregnant on the breezy shore: 
Swift Pedasus was added to their side, 
(Once great Aetiona__s, now Achillesa__ pride) 
Who, like in strength, in swiftness, and in grace, 
A mortal courser matcha__d the immortal race. 
Achilles speeds from tent to tent, and warms 
His hardy Myrmidons to blood and arms. 
[pg 293] 
All breathing death, around the chief they stand, 
A grim, terrific, formidable band: 
Grim as voracious wolves, that seek the springs244 
When scalding thirst their burning bowels wrings; 
When some tall stag, fresh-slaughtered in the wood, 
Has drencha__d their wide insatiate throats with blood, 
To the black fount they rush, a hideous throng, 
With paunch distended, and with lolling tongue, 
Fire fills their eye, their black jaws belch the gore, 
And gorged with slaughter still they thirst for more. 
Like furious, rusha__d the Myrmidonian crew, 
Such their dread strength, and such their deathful view. 
High in the midst the great Achilles stands, 
Directs their order, and the war commands. 
He, loved of Jove, had launcha__d for Iliona__s shores 
Full fifty vessels, manna__d with fifty oars: 
Five chosen leaders the fierce bands obey, 
Himself supreme in valour, as in sway. 
First marcha__d Menestheus, of celestial birth, 
Derived from thee, whose waters wash the earth, 
Divine Sperchius! Jove-descended flood! 
A mortal mother mixing with a god. 
Such was Menestheus, but miscalla__d by fame 
The son of Borus, that espoused the dame. 
Eudorus next; whom Polymele the gay, 
Famed in the graceful dance, produced to-day. 
Her, sly Cellenius loved: on her would gaze, 
As with swift step she forma__d the running maze: 
To her high chamber from Dianaa__s quire, 
The god pursued her, urged, and crowna__d his fire. 
The son confessa__d his fathera__s heavenly race, 
And heira__d his mothera__s swiftness in the chase. 
Strong Echecleus, blessa__d in all those charms 
That pleased a god, succeeded to her arms; 
Not conscious of those loves, long hid from fame, 
With gifts of price he sought and won the dame; 
Her secret offspring to her sire she bare; 
Her sire caressa__d him with a parenta__s care. 
Pisander followa__d; matchless in his art 
To wing the spear, or aim the distant dart; 
No hand so sure of all the Emathian line, 
Or if a surer, great Patroclus! thine. 
The fourth by Phoenixa__ grave command was graced, 
Laercesa__ valiant offspring led the last. 
Soon as Achilles with superior care 
Had calla__d the chiefs, and ordera__d all the war, 
[pg 294] 
This stern remembrance to his troops he gave: 
a_oeYe far-famed Myrmidons, ye fierce and brave! 
Think with what threats you dared the Trojan throng, 
Think what reproach these ears endured so long; 
a__Stern son of Peleus, (thus ye used to say, 
While restless, raging, in your ships you lay) 
Oh nursed with gall, unknowing how to yield; 
Whose rage defrauds us of so famed a field: 
If that dire fury must for ever burn, 
What make we here? Return, ye chiefs, return!a__ 
Such were your wordsa_"Now, warriors! grieve no more, 
Lo there the Trojans; bathe your swords in gore! 
This day shall give you all your soul demands, 
Glut all your hearts, and weary all your hands!a__ 
Illustration: DIANA. 
DIANA. 
Thus while he roused the fire in every breast, 
Close and more close the listening cohorts pressa__d; 
Ranks wedged in ranks; of arms a steely ring 
Still grows, and spreads, and thickens round the king. 
As when a circling wall the builder forms, 
Of strength defensive against wind and storms, 
Compacted stones the thickening work compose, 
And round him wide the rising structure grows: 
So helm to helm, and crest to crest they throng, 
Shield urged on shield, and man drove man along; 
Thick, undistinguisha__d plumes, together joina__d, 
Float in one sea, and wave before the wind. 
Far oa__er the rest in glittering pomp appear, 
There bold Automedon, Patroclus here; 
Brothers in arms, with equal fury fired; 
Two friends, two bodies with one soul inspired. 
But mindful of the gods, Achilles went 
To the rich coffer in his shady tent; 
There lay on heaps his various garments rolla__d, 
And costly furs, and carpets stiff with gold, 
(The presents of the silver-footed dame) 
From thence he took a bowl, of antique frame, 
Which never man had stained with ruddy wine, 
Nor raised in offerings to the power divine, 
[pg 295] 
But Peleusa__ son; and Peleusa__ son to none 
Had raised in offerings, but to Jove alone. 
This tinged with sulphur, sacred first to flame, 
He purged; and washa__d it in the running stream. 
Then cleansed his hands; and fixing for a space 
His eyes on heaven, his feet upon the place 
Of sacrifice, the purple draught he poura__d 
Forth in the midst; and thus the god implored: 
a_oeO thou supreme! high-throned all height above! 
O great Pelasgic, Dodonaean Jove! 
Who a__midst surrounding frosts, and vapours chill, 
Presida__st on bleak Dodonaa__s vocal hill: 
(Whose groves the Selli, race austere! surround, 
Their feet unwasha__d, their slumbers on the ground; 
Who hear, from rustling oaks, thy dark decrees; 
And catch the fates, low-whispered in the breeze;) 
Hear, as of old! Thou gava__st, at Thetisa__ prayer, 
Glory to me, and to the Greeks despair. 
Lo, to the dangers of the fighting field 
The best, the dearest of my friends, I yield, 
Though still determined, to my ships confined; 
Patroclus gone, I stay but half behind. 
Oh! be his guard thy providential care, 
Confirm his heart, and string his arm to war: 
Pressa__d by his single force let Hector see 
His fame in arms not owing all to me. 
But when the fleets are saved from foes and fire, 
Let him with conquest and renown retire; 
Preserve his arms, preserve his social train, 
And safe return him to these eyes again!a__ 
Great Jove consents to half the chiefa__s request, 
But heavena__s eternal doom denies the rest; 
To free the fleet was granted to his prayer; 
His safe return, the winds dispersed in air. 
Back to his tent the stern Achilles flies, 
And waits the combat with impatient eyes. 
Meanwhile the troops beneath Patroclusa__ care, 
Invade the Trojans, and commence the war. 
As wasps, provoked by children in their play, 
Pour from their mansions by the broad highway, 
In swarms the guiltless traveller engage, 
Whet all their stings, and call forth all their rage: 
All rise in arms, and, with a general cry, 
Assert their waxen domes, and buzzing progeny. 
Thus from the tents the fervent legion swarms, 
So loud their clamours, and so keen their arms: 
Their rising rage Patroclusa__ breath inspires, 
Who thus inflames them with heroic fires: 
a_oeO warriors, partners of Achillesa__ praise! 
Be mindful of your deeds in ancient days; 
[pg 296] 
Your godlike master let your acts proclaim, 
And add new glories to his mighty name. 
Think your Achilles sees you fight: be brave, 
And humble the proud monarch whom you save.a__ 
Joyful they heard, and kindling as he spoke, 
Flew to the fleet, involved in fire and smoke. 
From shore to shore the doubling shouts resound, 
The hollow ships return a deeper sound. 
The war stood still, and all around them gazed, 
When great Achillesa__ shining armour blazed: 
Troy saw, and thought the dread Achilles nigh, 
At once they see, they tremble, and they fly. 
Then first thy spear, divine Patroclus! flew, 
Where the war raged, and where the tumult grew. 
Close to the stern of that famed ship which bore 
Unblessa__d Protesilaus to Iliona__s shore, 
The great Paeonian, bold Pyrechmes stood; 
(Who led his bands from Axiusa__ winding flood;) 
His shoulder-blade receives the fatal wound; 
The groaning warrior pants upon the ground. 
His troops, that see their countrya__s glory slain, 
Fly diverse, scattera__d oa__er the distant plain. 
Patroclusa__ arm forbids the spreading fires, 
And from the half-burna__d ship proud Troy retires; 
Cleara__d from the smoke the joyful navy lies; 
In heaps on heaps the foe tumultuous flies; 
Triumphant Greece her rescued decks ascends, 
And loud acclaim the starry region rends. 
So when thick clouds enwrap the mountaina__s head, 
Oa__er heavena__s expanse like one black ceiling spread; 
Sudden the Thunderer, with a flashing ray, 
Bursts through the darkness, and lets down the day: 
The hills shine out, the rocks in prospect rise, 
And streams, and vales, and forests, strike the eyes; 
The smiling scene wide opens to the sight, 
And all the unmeasured ether flames with light. 
But Troy repulsed, and scattera__d oa__er the plains, 
Forced from the navy, yet the fight maintains. 
Now every Greek some hostile hero slew, 
But still the foremost, bold Patroclus flew: 
As Areilycus had turna__d him round, 
Sharp in his thigh he felt the piercing wound; 
The brazen-pointed spear, with vigour thrown, 
The thigh transfixa__d, and broke the brittle bone: 
Headlong he fell. Next, Thoas was thy chance; 
Thy breast, unarma__d, received the Spartan lance. 
Phylidesa__ dart (as Amphidus drew nigh) 
His blow prevented, and transpierced his thigh, 
Tore all the brawn, and rent the nerves away; 
In darkness, and in death, the warrior lay. 
[pg 297] 
In equal arms two sons of Nestor stand, 
And two bold brothers of the Lycian band: 
By great Antilochus, Atymnius dies, 
Pierced in the flank, lamented youth! he lies, 
Kind Maris, bleeding in his brothera__s wound, 
Defends the breathless carcase on the ground; 
Furious he flies, his murderer to engage: 
But godlike Thrasimed prevents his rage, 
Between his arm and shoulder aims a blow; 
His arm falls spouting on the dust below: 
He sinks, with endless darkness covera__d oa__er: 
And vents his soul, effused with gushing gore. 
Slain by two brothers, thus two brothers bleed, 
Sarpedona__s friends, Amisodarusa__ seed; 
Amisodarus, who, by Furies led, 
The bane of men, abhorra__d Chimaera bred; 
Skilla__d in the dart in vain, his sons expire, 
And pay the forfeit of their guilty sire. 
Stoppa__d in the tumult Cleobulus lies, 
Beneath Oileusa__ arm, a living prize; 
A living prize not long the Trojan stood; 
The thirsty falchion drank his reeking blood: 
Plunged in his throat the smoking weapon lies; 
Black death, and fate unpitying, seal his eyes. 
Amid the ranks, with mutual thirst of fame, 
Lycon the brave, and fierce Peneleus came; 
In vain their javelins at each other flew, 
Now, met in arms, their eager swords they drew. 
On the plumed crest of his Boeotian foe 
The daring Lycon aima__d a noble blow; 
The sword broke short; but his, Peneleus sped 
Full on the juncture of the neck and head: 
The head, divided by a stroke so just, 
Hung by the skin; the body sunk to dust. 
Oa__ertaken Neamas by Merion bleeds, 
Pierced through the shoulder as he mounts his steeds; 
Back from the car he tumbles to the ground: 
His swimming eyes eternal shades surround. 
Next Erymas was dooma__d his fate to feel, 
His opena__d mouth received the Cretan steel: 
Beneath the brain the point a passage tore, 
Crasha__d the thin bones, and drowna__d the teeth in gore: 
His mouth, his eyes, his nostrils, pour a flood; 
He sobs his soul out in the gush of blood. 
As when the flocks neglected by the swain, 
Or kids, or lambs, lie scattera__d oa__er the plain, 
A troop of wolves the unguarded charge survey, 
And rend the trembling, unresisting prey: 
Thus on the foe the Greeks impetuous came; 
Troy fled, unmindful of her former fame. 
[pg 298] 
But still at Hector godlike Ajax aima__d, 
Still, pointed at his breast, his javelin flamed. 
The Trojan chief, experienced in the field, 
Oa__er his broad shoulders spread the massy shield, 
Observed the storm of darts the Grecians pour, 
And on his buckler caught the ringing shower: 
He sees for Greece the scale of conquest rise, 
Yet stops, and turns, and saves his loved allies. 
As when the hand of Jove a tempest forms, 
And rolls the cloud to blacken heaven with storms, 
Dark oa__er the fields the ascending vapour flies, 
And shades the sun, and blots the golden skies: 
So from the ships, along the dusky plain, 
Dire Flight and Terror drove the Trojan train. 
Even Hector fled; through heads of disarray 
The fiery coursers forced their lord away: 
While far behind his Trojans fall confused; 
Wedged in the trench, in one vast carnage bruised: 
Chariots on chariots roll: the clashing spokes 
Shock; while the madding steeds break short their yokes. 
In vain they labour up the steepy mound; 
Their charioteers lie foaming on the ground. 
Fierce on the rear, with shouts Patroclus flies; 
Tumultuous clamour fills the fields and skies; 
Thick drifts of dust involve their rapid flight; 
Clouds rise on clouds, and heaven is snatcha__d from sight. 
The affrighted steeds their dying lords cast down, 
Scour oa__er the fields, and stretch to reach the town. 
Loud oa__er the rout was heard the victora__s cry, 
Where the war bleeds, and where the thickest die, 
Where horse and arms, and chariots he oa__erthrown, 
And bleeding heroes under axles groan. 
No stop, no check, the steeds of Peleus knew: 
From bank to bank the immortal coursers flew. 
High-bounding oa__er the fosse, the whirling car 
Smokes through the ranks, oa__ertakes the flying war, 
And thunders after Hector; Hector flies, 
Patroclus shakes his lance; but fate denies. 
Not with less noise, with less impetuous force, 
The tide of Trojans urge their desperate course, 
Than when in autumn Jove his fury pours, 
And earth is loaden with incessant showers; 
(When guilty mortals break the eternal laws, 
Or judges, bribed, betray the righteous cause;) 
From their deep beds he bids the rivers rise, 
And opens all the flood-gates of the skies: 
The impetuous torrents from their hills obey, 
Whole fields are drowna__d, and mountains swept away; 
Loud roars the deluge till it meets the main; 
And trembling man sees all his labours vain! 
[pg 299] 
And now the chief (the foremost troops repella__d) 
Back to the ships his destined progress held, 
Bore down half Troy in his resistless way, 
And forced the routed ranks to stand the day. 
Between the space where silver Simois flows, 
Where lay the fleets, and where the rampires rose, 
All grim in dust and blood Patroclus stands, 
And turns the slaughter on the conquering bands. 
First Pronous died beneath his fiery dart, 
Which pierced below the shield his valiant heart. 
Thestor was next, who saw the chief appear, 
And fell the victim of his coward fear; 
Shrunk up he sat, with wild and haggard eye, 
Nor stood to combat, nor had force to fly; 
Patroclus marka__d him as he shunna__d the war, 
And with unmanly tremblings shook the car, 
And droppa__d the flowing reins. Him a__twixt the jaws, 
The javelin sticks, and from the chariot draws. 
As on a rock that overhangs the main, 
An angler, studious of the line and cane, 
Some mighty fish draws panting to the shore: 
Not with less ease the barbed javelin bore 
The gaping dastard; as the spear was shook, 
He fell, and life his heartless breast forsook. 
Next on Eryalus he flies; a stone, 
Large as a rock, was by his fury thrown: 
Full on his crown the ponderous fragment flew, 
And burst the helm, and cleft the head in two: 
Prone to the ground the breathless warrior fell, 
And death involved him with the shades of hell. 
Then low in dust Epaltes, Echius, lie; 
Ipheas, Evippus, Polymelus, die; 
Amphoterus and Erymas succeed; 
And last Tlepolemus and Pyres bleed. 
Wherea__er he moves, the growing slaughters spread 
In heaps on heaps a monument of dead. 
When now Sarpedon his brave friends beheld 
Grovelling in dust, and gasping on the field, 
With this reproach his flying host he warms: 
a_oeOh stain to honour! oh disgrace to arms! 
Forsake, inglorious, the contended plain; 
This hand unaided shall the war sustain: 
The task be mine this heroa__s strength to try, 
Who mows whole troops, and makes an army fly.a__ 
He spake: and, speaking, leaps from off the car: 
Patroclus lights, and sternly waits the war. 
As when two vultures on the mountaina__s height 
Stoop with resounding pinions to the fight; 
They cuff, they tear, they raise a screaming cry; 
The desert echoes, and the rocks reply: 
[pg 300] 
The warriors thus opposed in arms, engage 
With equal clamours, and with equal rage. 
Jove viewa__d the combat: whose event foreseen, 
He thus bespoke his sister and his queen: 
a_oeThe hour draws on; the destinies ordain,245 
My godlike son shall press the Phrygian plain: 
Already on the verge of death he stands, 
His life is owed to fierce Patroclusa__ hands, 
What passions in a parenta__s breast debate! 
Say, shall I snatch him from impending fate, 
And send him safe to Lycia, distant far 
From all the dangers and the toils of war; 
Or to his doom my bravest offspring yield, 
And fatten, with celestial blood, the field?a__ 
Then thus the goddess with the radiant eyes: 
a_oeWhat words are these, O sovereign of the skies! 
Short is the date prescribed to mortal man; 
Shall Jove for one extend the narrow span, 
Whose bounds were fixa__d before his race began? 
How many sons of gods, foredooma__d to death, 
Before proud Ilion must resign their breath! 
Were thine exempt, debate would rise above, 
And murmuring powers condemn their partial Jove. 
Give the bold chief a glorious fate in fight; 
And when the ascending soul has winga__d her flight, 
Let Sleep and Death convey, by thy command, 
The breathless body to his native land. 
His friends and people, to his future praise, 
A marble tomb and pyramid shall raise, 
And lasting honours to his ashes give; 
His fame (a__tis all the dead can have) shall live.a__ 
She said: the cloud-compeller, overcome, 
Assents to fate, and ratifies the doom. 
Then toucha__d with grief, the weeping heavens distilla__d 
A shower of blood oa__er all the fatal field: 
[pg 301] 
The god, his eyes averting from the plain, 
Laments his son, predestined to be slain, 
Far from the Lycian shores, his happy native reign. 
Now met in arms, the combatants appear; 
Each heaved the shield, and poised the lifted spear; 
From strong Patroclusa__ hand the javelin fled, 
And passa__d the groin of valiant Thrasymed; 
The nerves unbraced no more his bulk sustain, 
He falls, and falling bites the bloody plain. 
Two sounding darts the Lycian leader threw: 
The first aloof with erring fury flew, 
The next transpierced Achillesa__ mortal steed, 
The generous Pedasus of Theban breed: 
Fixa__d in the shouldera__s joint, he reela__d around, 
Rolla__d in the bloody dust, and pawa__d the slippery ground. 
His sudden fall the entangled harness broke; 
Each axle crackled, and the chariot shook: 
When bold Automedon, to disengage 
The starting coursers, and restrain their rage, 
Divides the traces with his sword, and freed 
The encumbered chariot from the dying steed: 
The rest move on, obedient to the rein: 
The car rolls slowly oa__er the dusty plain. 
The towering chiefs to fiercer fight advance: 
And first Sarpedon whirla__d his weighty lance, 
Which oa__er the warriora__s shoulder took its course, 
And spent in empty air its dying force. 
Not so Patroclusa__ never-erring dart; 
Aima__d at his breast it pierced a mortal part, 
Where the strong fibres bind the solid heart. 
Then as the mountain oak, or poplar tall, 
Or pine (fit mast for some great admiral) 
Nods to the axe, till with a groaning sound 
It sinks, and spreads its honours on the ground, 
Thus fell the king; and laid on earth supine, 
Before his chariot stretcha__d his form divine: 
He graspa__d the dust distaina__d with streaming gore, 
And, pale in death, lay groaning on the shore. 
So lies a bull beneath the liona__s paws, 
While the grim savage grinds with foamy jaws 
The trembling limbs, and sucks the smoking blood; 
Deep groans, and hollow roars, rebellow through the wood. 
Then to the leader of the Lycian band 
The dying chief addressa__d his last command; 
a_oeGlaucus, be bold; thy task be first to dare 
The glorious dangers of destructive war, 
To lead my troops, to combat at their head, 
Incite the living, and supply the dead. 
Tell them, I charged them with my latest breath 
Not unrevenged to bear Sarpedona__s death. 
[pg 302] 
What grief, what shame, must Glaucus undergo, 
If these spoila__d arms adorn a Grecian foe! 
Then as a friend, and as a warrior fight; 
Defend my body, conquer in my right: 
That, taught by great examples, all may try 
Like thee to vanquish, or like me to die.a__ 
He ceased; the Fates suppressa__d his labouring breath, 
And his eyes darkena__d with the shades of death. 
The insulting victor with disdain bestrode 
The prostrate prince, and on his bosom trod; 
Then drew the weapon from his panting heart, 
The reeking fibres clinging to the dart; 
From the wide wound gusha__d out a stream of blood, 
And the soul issued in the purple flood. 
His flying steeds the Myrmidons detain, 
Unguided now, their mighty master slain. 
All-impotent of aid, transfixa__d with grief, 
Unhappy Glaucus heard the dying chief: 
His painful arm, yet useless with the smart 
Inflicted late by Teucera__s deadly dart, 
Supported on his better hand he staya__d: 
To Phoebus then (a__twas all he could) he praya__d: 
a_oeAll-seeing monarch! whether Lyciaa__s coast, 
Or sacred Ilion, thy bright presence boast, 
Powerful alike to ease the wretcha__s smart; 
O hear me! god of every healing art! 
Lo! stiff with clotted blood, and pierced with pain, 
That thrills my arm, and shoots through every vein, 
I stand unable to sustain the spear, 
And sigh, at distance from the glorious war. 
Low in the dust is great Sarpedon laid, 
Nor Jove vouchsafed his hapless offspring aid; 
But thou, O god of health! thy succour lend, 
To guard the relics of my slaughtera__d friend: 
For thou, though distant, canst restore my might, 
To head my Lycians, and support the fight.a__ 
Apollo heard; and, suppliant as he stood, 
His heavenly hand restraina__d the flux of blood; 
He drew the dolours from the wounded part, 
And breathed a spirit in his rising heart. 
Renewa__d by art divine, the hero stands, 
And owns the assistance of immortal hands. 
First to the fight his native troops he warms, 
Then loudly calls on Troya__s vindictive arms; 
With ample strides he stalks from place to place; 
Now fires Agenor, now Polydamas: 
A_neas next, and Hector he accosts; 
Inflaming thus the rage of all their hosts. 
a_oeWhat thoughts, regardless chief! thy breast employ? 
Oh too forgetful of the friends of Troy! 
[pg 303] 
Those generous friends, who, from their country far, 
Breathe their brave souls out in anothera__s war. 
See! where in dust the great Sarpedon lies, 
In action valiant, and in council wise, 
Who guarded right, and kept his people free; 
To all his Lycians lost, and lost to thee! 
Stretcha__d by Patroclusa__ arm on yonder plains, 
O save from hostile rage his loved remains! 
Ah let not Greece his conquera__d trophies boast, 
Nor on his corse revenge her heroes lost!a__ 
He spoke: each leader in his grief partook: 
Troy, at the loss, through all her legions shook. 
Transfixa__d with deep regret, they view oa__erthrown 
At once his countrya__s pillar, and their own; 
A chief, who led to Troya__s beleaguera__d wall 
A host of heroes, and outshined them all. 
Fired, they rush on; first Hector seeks the foes, 
And with superior vengeance greatly glows. 
But oa__er the dead the fierce Patroclus stands, 
And rousing Ajax, roused the listening bands: 
a_oeHeroes, be men; be what you were before; 
Or weigh the great occasion, and be more. 
The chief who taught our lofty walls to yield, 
Lies pale in death, extended on the field. 
To guard his body Troy in numbers flies; 
Tis half the glory to maintain our prize. 
Haste, strip his arms, the slaughter round him spread, 
And send the living Lycians to the dead.a__ 
The heroes kindle at his fierce command; 
The martial squadrons close on either hand: 
Here Troy and Lycia charge with loud alarms, 
Thessalia there, and Greece, oppose their arms. 
With horrid shouts they circle round the slain; 
The clash of armour rings oa__er all the plain. 
Great Jove, to swell the horrors of the fight, 
Oa__er the fierce armies pours pernicious night, 
And round his son confounds the warring hosts, 
His fate ennobling with a crowd of ghosts. 
Now Greece gives way, and great Epigeus falls; 
Agacleusa__ son, from Budiuma__s lofty walls; 
Who chased for murder thence a suppliant came 
To Peleus, and the silver-footed dame; 
Now sent to Troy, Achillesa__ arms to aid, 
He pays due vengeance to his kinsmana__s shade. 
Soon as his luckless hand had toucha__d the dead, 
A rocka__s large fragment thundera__d on his head; 
Hurla__d by Hectorean force it cleft in twain 
His shattera__d helm, and stretcha__d him oa__er the slain. 
Fierce to the van of fight Patroclus came, 
And, like an eagle darting at his game, 
[pg 304] 
Sprung on the Trojan and the Lycian band. 
What grief thy heart, what fury urged thy hand, 
O generous Greek! when with full vigour thrown, 
At Sthenelaus flew the weighty stone, 
Which sunk him to the dead: when Troy, too near 
That arm, drew back; and Hector learna__d to fear. 
Far as an able hand a lance can throw, 
Or at the lists, or at the fighting foe; 
So far the Trojans from their lines retired; 
Till Glaucus, turning, all the rest inspired. 
Then Bathyclaeus fell beneath his rage, 
The only hope of Chalcona__s trembling age; 
Wide oa__er the land was stretcha__d his large domain, 
With stately seats, and riches blest in vain: 
Him, bold with youth, and eager to pursue 
The flying Lycians, Glaucus met and slew; 
Pierced through the bosom with a sudden wound, 
He fell, and falling made the fields resound. 
The Achaians sorrow for their heroes slain; 
With conquering shouts the Trojans shake the plain, 
And crowd to spoil the dead: the Greeks oppose; 
An iron circle round the carcase grows. 
Then brave Laogonus resigna__d his breath, 
Despatcha__d by Merion to the shades of death: 
On Idaa__s holy hill he made abode, 
The priest of Jove, and honoura__d like his god. 
Between the jaw and ear the javelin went; 
The soul, exhaling, issued at the vent. 
His spear Aeneas at the victor threw, 
Who stooping forward from the death withdrew; 
The lance hissa__d harmless oa__er his covering shield, 
And trembling struck, and rooted in the field; 
There yet scarce spent, it quivers on the plain, 
Sent by the great Aeneasa__ arm in vain. 
a_oeSwift as thou art (the raging hero cries) 
And skilla__d in dancing to dispute the prize, 
My spear, the destined passage had it found, 
Had fixa__d thy active vigour to the ground.a__ 
a_oeO valiant leader of the Dardan host! 
(Insulted Merion thus retorts the boast) 
Strong as you are, a__tis mortal force you trust, 
An arm as strong may stretch thee in the dust. 
And if to this my lance thy fate be given, 
Vain are thy vaunts; success is still from heaven: 
This, instant, sends thee down to Plutoa__s coast; 
Mine is the glory, his thy parting ghost.a__ 
a_oeO friend (Menoetiusa__ son this answer gave) 
With words to combat, ill befits the brave; 
Not empty boasts the sons of Troy repel, 
Your swords must plunge them to the shades of hell. 
[pg 305] 
To speak, beseems the council; but to dare 
In glorious action, is the task of war.a__ 
This said, Patroclus to the battle flies; 
Great Merion follows, and new shouts arise: 
Shields, helmets rattle, as the warriors close; 
And thick and heavy sounds the storm of blows. 
As through the shrilling vale, or mountain ground, 
The labours of the woodmana__s axe resound; 
Blows following blows are heard re-echoing wide, 
While crackling forests fall on every side: 
Thus echoed all the fields with loud alarms, 
So fell the warriors, and so rung their arms. 
Now great Sarpedon on the sandy shore, 
His heavenly form defaced with dust and gore, 
And stuck with darts by warring heroes shed, 
Lies undistinguisha__d from the vulgar dead. 
His long-disputed corse the chiefs enclose, 
On every side the busy combat grows; 
Thick as beneath some shepherda__s thatcha__d abode 
(The pails high foaming with a milky flood) 
The buzzing flies, a persevering train, 
Incessant swarm, and chased return again. 
Jove viewa__d the combat with a stern survey, 
And eyes that flasha__d intolerable day. 
Fixa__d on the field his sight, his breast debates 
The vengeance due, and meditates the fates: 
Whether to urge their prompt effect, and call 
The force of Hector to Patroclusa__ fall, 
This instant see his short-lived trophies won, 
And stretch him breathless on his slaughtera__d son; 
Or yet, with many a soula__s untimely flight, 
Augment the fame and horror of the fight. 
To crown Achillesa__ valiant friend with praise 
At length he dooms; and, that his last of days 
Shall set in glory, bids him drive the foe; 
Nor unattended see the shades below. 
Then Hectora__s mind he fills with dire dismay; 
He mounts his car, and calls his hosts away; 
Sunk with Troya__s heavy fates, he sees decline 
The scales of Jove, and pants with awe divine. 
Then, nor before, the hardy Lycians fled, 
And left their monarch with the common dead: 
Around, in heaps on heaps, a dreadful wall 
Of carnage rises, as the heroes fall. 
(So Jove decreed!) At length the Greeks obtain 
The prize contested, and despoil the slain. 
The radiant arms are by Patroclus borne; 
Patroclusa__ ships the glorious spoils adorn. 
Then thus to Phoebus, in the realms above, 
Spoke from his throne the cloud-compelling Jove: 
[pg 306] 
a_oeDescend, my Phoebus! on the Phrygian plain, 
And from the fight convey Sarpedon slain; 
Then bathe his body in the crystal flood, 
With dust dishonoura__d, and deforma__d with blood; 
Oa__er all his limbs ambrosial odours shed, 
And with celestial robes adorn the dead. 
Those rites discharged, his sacred corse bequeath 
To the soft arms of silent Sleep and Death. 
They to his friends the immortal charge shall bear; 
His friends a tomb and pyramid shall rear: 
What honour mortals after death receive, 
Those unavailing honours we may give!a__ 
Illustration: SLEEP AND DEATH CONVEYING THE BODY OF SARPEDON TO LYCIA. 
SLEEP AND DEATH CONVEYING THE BODY OF SARPEDON TO LYCIA. 
Apollo bows, and from mount Idaa__s height, 
Swift to the field precipitates his flight; 
Thence from the war the breathless hero bore, 
Veila__d in a cloud, to silver Simoisa__ shore; 
There bathed his honourable wounds, and dressa__d 
His manly members in the immortal vest; 
And with perfumes of sweet ambrosial dews 
Restores his freshness, and his form renews. 
Then Sleep and Death, two twins of winged race, 
Of matchless swiftness, but of silent pace, 
Received Sarpedon, at the goda__s command, 
And in a moment reacha__d the Lycian land; 
The corse amidst his weeping friends they laid, 
Where endless honours wait the sacred shade. 
Meanwhile Patroclus pours along the plains, 
With foaming coursers, and with loosena__d reins. 
Fierce on the Trojan and the Lycian crew, 
[pg 307] 
Ah blind to fate! thy headlong fury flew 
Against what fate and powerful Jove ordain, 
Vain was thy frienda__s command, thy courage vain. 
For he, the god, whose counsels uncontrolla__d 
Dismay the mighty, and confound the bold; 
The god who gives, resumes, and orders all, 
He urged thee on, and urged thee on to fall. 
Who first, brave hero! by that arm was slain, 
Who last beneath thy vengeance pressa__d the plain; 
When heaven itself thy fatal fury led, 
And calla__d to fill the number of the dead? 
Adrestus first; Autonous then succeeds; 
Echeclus follows; next young Megas bleeds, 
Epistor, Melanippus, bite the ground; 
The slaughter, Elasus and Mulius crowna__d: 
Then sunk Pylartes to eternal night; 
The rest, dispersing, trust their fates to flight. 
Now Troy had stoopa__d beneath his matchless power, 
But flaming Phoebus kept the sacred tower 
Thrice at the battlements Patroclus strook;246 
His blazing aegis thrice Apollo shook; 
He tried the fourth; when, bursting from the cloud, 
A more than mortal voice was heard aloud. 
a_oePatroclus! cease; this heaven-defended wall 
Defies thy lance; not fated yet to fall; 
Thy friend, thy greater far, it shall withstand, 
Troy shall not stoop even to Achillesa__ hand.a__ 
So spoke the god who darts celestial fires; 
The Greek obeys him, and with awe retires. 
While Hector, checking at the Scaean gates 
His panting coursers, in his breast debates, 
Or in the field his forces to employ, 
Or draw the troops within the walls of Troy. 
Thus while he thought, beside him Phoebus stood, 
In Asiusa__ shape, who reigned by Sangara__s flood; 
(Thy brother, Hecuba! from Dymas sprung, 
A valiant warrior, haughty, bold, and young;) 
Thus he accosts him. a_oeWhat a shameful sight! 
God! is it Hector that forbears the fight? 
Were thine my vigour this successful spear 
Should soon convince thee of so false a fear. 
Turn thee, ah turn thee to the field of fame, 
[pg 308] 
And in Patroclusa__ blood efface thy shame. 
Perhaps Apollo shall thy arms succeed, 
And heaven ordains him by thy lance to bleed.a__ 
So spoke the inspiring god; then took his flight, 
And plunged amidst the tumult of the fight. 
He bids Cebrion drive the rapid car; 
The lash resounds, the coursers rush to war. 
The god the Greciansa__ sinking souls depressa__d, 
And poura__d swift spirits through each Trojan breast. 
Patroclus lights, impatient for the fight; 
A spear his left, a stone employs his right: 
With all his nerves he drives it at the foe. 
Pointed above, and rough and gross below: 
The falling ruin crusha__d Cebriona__s head, 
The lawless offspring of king Priama__s bed; 
His front, brows, eyes, one undistinguisha__d wound: 
The bursting balls drop sightless to the ground. 
The charioteer, while yet he held the rein, 
Struck from the car, falls headlong on the plain. 
To the dark shades the soul unwilling glides, 
While the proud victor thus his fall derides. 
a_oeGood heaven! what active feats yon artist shows! 
What skilful divers are our Phrygian foes! 
Mark with what ease they sink into the sand! 
Pity that all their practice is by land!a__ 
Then rushing sudden on his prostrate prize, 
To spoil the carcase fierce Patroclus flies: 
Swift as a lion, terrible and bold, 
That sweeps the field, depopulates the fold; 
Pierced through the dauntless heart, then tumbles slain, 
And from his fatal courage finds his bane. 
At once bold Hector leaping from his car, 
Defends the body, and provokes the war. 
Thus for some slaughtera__d hind, with equal rage, 
Two lordly rulers of the wood engage; 
Stung with fierce hunger, each the prey invades, 
And echoing roars rebellow through the shades. 
Stern Hector fastens on the warriora__s head, 
And by the foot Patroclus drags the dead: 
While all around, confusion, rage, and fright, 
Mix the contending hosts in mortal fight. 
So pent by hills, the wild winds roar aloud 
In the deep bosom of some gloomy wood; 
Leaves, arms, and trees, aloft in air are blown, 
The broad oaks crackle, and the Sylvans groan; 
This way and that, the rattling thicket bends, 
And the whole forest in one crash descends. 
Not with less noise, with less tumultuous rage, 
In dreadful shock the mingled hosts engage. 
Darts showera__d on darts, now round the carcase ring; 
[pg 309] 
Now flights of arrows bounding from the string: 
Stones follow stones; some clatter on the fields, 
Some hard, and heavy, shake the sounding shields. 
But where the rising whirlwind clouds the plains, 
Sunk in soft dust the mighty chief remains, 
And, stretcha__d in death, forgets the guiding reins! 
Now flaming from the zenith, Sol had driven 
His fervid orb through half the vault of heaven; 
While on each host with equal tempests fell 
The showering darts, and numbers sank to hell. 
But when his evening wheels oa__erhung the main, 
Glad conquest rested on the Grecian train. 
Then from amidst the tumult and alarms, 
They draw the conquera__d corse and radiant arms. 
Then rash Patroclus with new fury glows, 
And breathing slaughter, pours amid the foes. 
Thrice on the press like Mars himself he flew, 
And thrice three heroes at each onset slew. 
There ends thy glory! there the Fates untwine 
The last, black remnant of so bright a line: 
Apollo dreadful stops thy middle way; 
Death calls, and heaven allows no longer day! 
For lo! the god in dusky clouds enshrined, 
Approaching dealt a staggering blow behind. 
The weighty shock his neck and shoulders feel; 
His eyes flash sparkles, his stunna__d senses reel 
In giddy darkness; far to distance flung, 
His bounding helmet on the champaign rung. 
Achillesa__ plume is staina__d with dust and gore; 
That plume which never stoopa__d to earth before; 
Long used, untoucha__d, in fighting fields to shine, 
And shade the temples of the mad divine. 
Jove dooms it now on Hectora__s helm to nod; 
Not longa_"for fate pursues him, and the god. 
His spear in shivers falls; his ample shield 
Drops from his arm: his baldric strows the field: 
The corslet his astonisha__d breast forsakes: 
Loose is each joint; each nerve with horror shakes; 
Stupid he stares, and all-assistless stands: 
Such is the force of more than mortal hands! 
A Dardan youth there was, well known to fame, 
From Panthus sprung, Euphorbus was his name; 
Famed for the manage of the foaming horse, 
Skilla__d in the dart, and matchless in the course: 
Full twenty knights he tumbled from the car, 
While yet he learna__d his rudiments of war. 
His venturous spear first drew the heroa__s gore; 
He struck, he wounded, but he durst no more. 
Nor, though disarma__d, Patroclusa__ fury stood: 
But swift withdrew the long-protended wood. 
[pg 310] 
And turna__d him short, and herded in the crowd. 
Thus, by an arm divine, and mortal spear, 
Wounded, at once, Patroclus yields to fear, 
Retires for succour to his social train, 
And flies the fate, which heaven decreed, in vain. 
Stern Hector, as the bleeding chief he views, 
Breaks through the ranks, and his retreat pursues: 
The lance arrests him with a mortal wound; 
He falls, earth thunders, and his arms resound. 
With him all Greece was sunk; that moment all 
Her yet-surviving heroes seema__d to fall. 
So, scorcha__d with heat, along the desert score, 
The roaming lion meets a bristly boar, 
Fast by the spring; they both dispute the flood, 
With flaming eyes, and jaws besmeara__d with blood; 
At length the sovereign savage wins the strife; 
And the torn boar resigns his thirst and life. 
Patroclus thus, so many chiefs oa__erthrown, 
So many lives effused, expires his own. 
As dying now at Hectora__s feet he lies, 
He sternly views him, and triumphant cries: 
a_oeLie there, Patroclus! and with thee, the joy 
Thy pride once promised, of subverting Troy; 
The fancied scenes of Ilion wrapt in flames, 
And thy soft pleasures served with captive dames. 
Unthinking man! I fought those towers to free, 
And guard that beauteous race from lords like thee: 
But thou a prey to vultures shalt be made; 
Thy own Achilles cannot lend thee aid; 
Though much at parting that great chief might say, 
And much enjoin thee, this important day. 
a__Return not, my brave friend (perhaps he said), 
Without the bloody arms of Hector dead.a__ 
He spoke, Patroclus marcha__d, and thus he sped.a__ 
Supine, and wildly gazing on the skies, 
With faint, expiring breath, the chief replies: 
a_oeVain boaster! cease, and know the powers divine! 
Jovea__s and Apolloa__s is this deed, not thine; 
To heaven is owed whatea__er your own you call, 
And heaven itself disarma__d me ere my fall. 
Had twenty mortals, each thy match in might, 
Opposed me fairly, they had sunk in fight: 
By fate and Phoebus was I first oa__erthrown, 
Euphorbus next; the third mean part thy own. 
But thou, imperious! hear my latest breath; 
The gods inspire it, and it sounds thy death: 
Insulting man, thou shalt be soon as I; 
Black fate oa__erhangs thee, and thy hour draws nigh; 
Even now on lifea__s last verge I see thee stand, 
I see thee fall, and by Achillesa__ hand.a__ 
[pg 311] 
He faints: the soul unwilling wings her way, 
(The beauteous body left a load of clay) 
Flits to the lone, uncomfortable coast; 
A naked, wandering, melancholy ghost! 
Then Hector pausing, as his eyes he fed 
On the pale carcase, thus addressa__d the dead: 
a_oeFrom whence this boding speech, the stern decree 
Of death denounced, or why denounced to me? 
Why not as well Achillesa__ fate be given 
To Hectora__s lance? Who knows the will of heaven?a__ 
Pensive he said; then pressing as he lay 
His breathless bosom, tore the lance away; 
And upwards cast the corse: the reeking spear 
He shakes, and charges the bold charioteer. 
But swift Automedon with loosena__d reins 
Rapt in the chariot oa__er the distant plains, 
Far from his rage the immortal coursers drove; 
The immortal coursers were the gift of Jove. 
Illustration: A_SCULAPIUS. 
A_SCULAPIUS. 
[pg 312] 
BOOK XVII. 
ARGUMENT. 
THE SEVENTH BATTLE, FOR THE BODY OF PATROCLUS.a_"THE ACTS OF MENELAUS. 
Menelaus, upon the death of Patroclus, defends his body from the enemy: 
Euphorbus, who attempts it, is slain. Hector advancing, Menelaus 
retires; but soon returns with Ajax, and drives him off. This, Glaucus 
objects to Hector as a flight, who thereupon puts on the armour he had 
won from Patroclus, and renews the battle. The Greeks give way, till 
Ajax rallies them: Aeneas sustains the Trojans. Aeneas and Hector 
Attempt the chariot of Achilles, which is borne off by Automedon. The 
horses of Achilles deplore the loss of Patroclus: Jupiter covers his 
body with a thick darkness: the noble prayer of Ajax on that occasion. 
Menelaus sends Antilochus to Achilles, with the news of Patroclusa__ 
death: then returns to the fight, where, though attacked with the 
utmost fury, he and Meriones, assisted by the Ajaces, bear off the body 
to the ships. 
The time is the evening of the eight-and-twentieth day. The scene lies 
in the fields before Troy. 
On the cold earth divine Patroclus spread, 
Lies pierced with wounds among the vulgar dead. 
Great Menelaus, toucha__d with generous woe, 
Springs to the front, and guards him from the foe. 
Thus round her new-fallen young the heifer moves, 
Fruit of her throes, and first-born of her loves; 
And anxious (helpless as he lies, and bare) 
Turns, and re-turns her, with a mothera__s care, 
Opposed to each that near the carcase came, 
His broad shield glimmers, and his lances flame. 
The son of Panthus, skilla__d the dart to send, 
Eyes the dead hero, and insults the friend. 
a_oeThis hand, Atrides, laid Patroclus low; 
Warrior! desist, nor tempt an equal blow: 
To me the spoils my prowess won, resign: 
Depart with life, and leave the glory minea__ 
The Trojan thus: the Spartan monarch burna__d 
With generous anguish, and in scorn returna__d: 
[pg 313] 
a_oeLaugha__st thou not, Jove! from thy superior throne, 
When mortals boast of prowess not their own? 
Not thus the lion glories in his might, 
Nor panther braves his spotted foe in fight, 
Nor thus the boar (those terrors of the plain;) 
Man only vaunts his force, and vaunts in vain. 
But far the vainest of the boastful kind, 
These sons of Panthus vent their haughty mind. 
Yet a__twas but late, beneath my conquering steel 
This boastera__s brother, Hyperenor, fell; 
Against our arm which rashly he defied, 
Vain was his vigour, and as vain his pride. 
These eyes beheld him on the dust expire, 
No more to cheer his spouse, or glad his sire. 
Presumptuous youth! like his shall be thy doom, 
Go, wait thy brother to the Stygian gloom; 
Or, while thou maya__st, avoid the threatena__d fate; 
Fools stay to feel it, and are wise too late.a__ 
Unmoved, Euphorbus thus: a_oeThat action known, 
Come, for my brothera__s blood repay thy own. 
His weeping father claims thy destined head, 
And spouse, a widow in her bridal bed. 
On these thy conquera__d spoils I shall bestow, 
To soothe a consorta__s and a parenta__s woe. 
No longer then defer the glorious strife, 
Let heaven decide our fortune, fame, and life.a__ 
Swift as the word the missile lance he flings; 
The well-aima__d weapon on the buckler rings, 
But blunted by the brass, innoxious falls. 
On Jove the father great Atrides calls, 
Nor flies the javelin from his arm in vain, 
It pierced his throat, and bent him to the plain; 
Wide through the neck appears the grisly wound, 
Prone sinks the warrior, and his arms resound. 
The shining circlets of his golden hair, 
Which even the Graces might be proud to wear, 
Instarra__d with gems and gold, bestrow the shore, 
With dust dishonoura__d, and deforma__d with gore. 
As the young olive, in some sylvan scene, 
Crowna__d by fresh fountains with eternal green, 
Lifts the gay head, in snowy flowerets fair, 
And plays and dances to the gentle air; 
When lo! a whirlwind from high heaven invades 
The tender plant, and withers all its shades; 
It lies uprooted from its genial bed, 
A lovely ruin now defaced and dead: 
Thus young, thus beautiful, Euphorbus lay, 
While the fierce Spartan tore his arms away. 
Proud of his deed, and glorious in the prize, 
Affrighted Troy the towering victor flies: 
[pg 314] 
Flies, as before some mountain liona__s ire 
The village curs and trembling swains retire, 
When oa__er the slaughtera__d bull they hear him roar, 
And see his jaws distil with smoking gore: 
All pale with fear, at distance scattera__d round, 
They shout incessant, and the vales resound. 
Meanwhile Apollo viewa__d with envious eyes, 
And urged great Hector to dispute the prize; 
(In Mentesa__ shape, beneath whose martial care 
The rough Ciconians learna__d the trade of war;)247 
a_oeForbear (he cried) with fruitless speed to chase 
Achillesa__ coursers, of ethereal race; 
They stoop not, these, to mortal mana__s command, 
Or stoop to none but great Achillesa__ hand. 
Too long amused with a pursuit so vain, 
Turn, and behold the brave Euphorbus slain; 
By Sparta slain! for ever now suppressa__d 
The fire which burna__d in that undaunted breast!a__ 
Thus having spoke, Apollo winga__d his flight, 
And mixa__d with mortals in the toils of fight: 
His words infixa__d unutterable care 
Deep in great Hectora__s soul: through all the war 
He darts his anxious eye; and, instant, viewa__d 
The breathless hero in his blood imbued, 
(Forth welling from the wound, as prone he lay) 
And in the victora__s hands the shining prey. 
Sheatha__d in bright arms, through cleaving ranks he flies, 
And sends his voice in thunder to the skies: 
Fierce as a flood of flame by Vulcan sent, 
It flew, and fired the nations as it went. 
Atrides from the voice the storm divined, 
And thus explored his own unconquera__d mind: 
a_oeThen shall I quit Patroclus on the plain, 
Slain in my cause, and for my honour slain! 
Desert the arms, the relics, of my friend? 
Or singly, Hector and his troops attend? 
Sure where such partial favour heaven bestowa__d, 
To brave the hero were to brave the god: 
Forgive me, Greece, if once I quit the field; 
a__Tis not to Hector, but to heaven I yield. 
Yet, nor the god, nor heaven, should give me fear, 
Did but the voice of Ajax reach my ear: 
Still would we turn, still battle on the plains, 
And give Achilles all that yet remains 
Of his and our Patroclusa_"a__ This, no more 
The time allowa__d: Troy thickena__d on the shore. 
A sable scene! The terrors Hector led. 
Slow he recedes, and sighing quits the dead. 
So from the fold the unwilling lion parts, 
[pg 315] 
Forced by loud clamours, and a storm of darts; 
He flies indeed, but threatens as he flies, 
With heart indignant and retorted eyes. 
Now entera__d in the Spartan ranks, he turna__d 
His manly breast, and with new fury burna__d; 
Oa__er all the black battalions sent his view, 
And through the cloud the godlike Ajax knew; 
Where labouring on the left the warrior stood, 
All grim in arms, and covera__d oa__er with blood; 
There breathing courage, where the god of day 
Had sunk each heart with terror and dismay. 
To him the king: a_oeOh Ajax, oh my friend! 
Haste, and Patroclusa__ loved remains defend: 
The body to Achilles to restore 
Demands our care; alas, we can no more! 
For naked now, despoiled of arms, he lies; 
And Hector glories in the dazzling prize.a__ 
He said, and toucha__d his heart. The raging pair 
Pierced the thick battle, and provoke the war. 
Already had stern Hector seized his head, 
And dooma__d to Trojan gods the unhappy dead; 
But soon as Ajax reara__d his tower-like shield, 
Sprung to his car, and measured back the field, 
His train to Troy the radiant armour bear, 
To stand a trophy of his fame in war. 
Meanwhile great Ajax (his broad shield displaya__d) 
Guards the dead hero with the dreadful shade; 
And now before, and now behind he stood: 
Thus in the centre of some gloomy wood, 
With many a step, the lioness surrounds 
Her tawny young, beset by men and hounds; 
Elate her heart, and rousing all her powers, 
Dark oa__er the fiery balls each hanging eyebrow lours. 
Fast by his side the generous Spartan glows 
With great revenge, and feeds his inward woes. 
But Glaucus, leader of the Lycian aids, 
On Hector frowning, thus his flight upbraids: 
a_oeWhere now in Hector shall we Hector find? 
A manly form, without a manly mind. 
Is this, O chief! a heroa__s boasted fame? 
How vain, without the merit, is the name! 
Since battle is renounced, thy thoughts employ 
What other methods may preserve thy Troy: 
a__Tis time to try if Iliona__s state can stand 
By thee alone, nor ask a foreign hand: 
Mean, empty boast! but shall the Lycians stake 
Their lives for you? those Lycians you forsake? 
What from thy thankless arms can we expect? 
Thy friend Sarpedon proves thy base neglect; 
Say, shall our slaughtera__d bodies guard your walls, 
[pg 316] 
While unrevenga__d the great Sarpedon falls? 
Even where he died for Troy, you left him there, 
A feast for dogs, and all the fowls of air. 
On my command if any Lycian wait, 
Hence let him march, and give up Troy to fate. 
Did such a spirit as the gods impart 
Impel one Trojan hand or Trojan heart, 
(Such as should burn in every soul that draws 
The sword for glory, and his countrya__s cause) 
Even yet our mutual arms we might employ, 
And drag yon carcase to the walls of Troy. 
Oh! were Patroclus ours, we might obtain 
Sarpedona__s arms and honoura__d corse again! 
Greece with Achillesa__ friend should be repaid, 
And thus due honours purchased to his shade. 
But words are vaina_"Let Ajax once appear, 
And Hector trembles and recedes with fear; 
Thou dara__st not meet the terrors of his eye; 
And lo! already thou prepara__st to fly.a__ 
The Trojan chief with fixa__d resentment eyed 
The Lycian leader, and sedate replied: 
a_oeSay, is it just, my friend, that Hectora__s ear 
From such a warrior such a speech should hear? 
I deema__d thee once the wisest of thy kind, 
But ill this insult suits a prudent mind. 
I shun great Ajax? I desert my train? 
a__Tis mine to prove the rash assertion vain; 
I joy to mingle where the battle bleeds, 
And hear the thunder of the sounding steeds. 
But Jovea__s high will is ever uncontrolla__d, 
The strong he withers, and confounds the bold; 
Now crowns with fame the mighty man, and now 
Strikes the fresh garland from the victora__s brow! 
Come, through yon squadrons let us hew the way, 
And thou be witness, if I fear to-day; 
If yet a Greek the sight of Hector dread, 
Or yet their hero dare defend the dead.a__ 
Then turning to the martial hosts, he cries: 
a_oeYe Trojans, Dardans, Lycians, and allies! 
Be men, my friends, in action as in name, 
And yet be mindful of your ancient fame. 
Hector in proud Achillesa__ arms shall shine, 
Torn from his friend, by right of conquest mine.a__ 
He strode along the field, as thus he said: 
(The sable plumage nodded oa__er his head:) 
Swift through the spacious plain he sent a look; 
One instant saw, one instant overtook 
The distant band, that on the sandy shore 
The radiant spoils to sacred Ilion bore. 
There his own mail unbraced the field bestrowa__d; 
[pg 317] 
His train to Troy conveya__d the massy load. 
Now blazing in the immortal arms he stands; 
The work and present of celestial hands; 
By aged Peleus to Achilles given, 
As first to Peleus by the court of heaven: 
His fathera__s arms not long Achilles wears, 
Forbid by fate to reach his fathera__s years. 
Him, proud in triumph, glittering from afar, 
The god whose thunder rends the troubled air 
Beheld with pity; as apart he sat, 
And, conscious, looka__d through all the scene of fate. 
He shook the sacred honours of his head; 
Olympus trembled, and the godhead said; 
a_oeAh, wretched man! unmindful of thy end! 
A momenta__s glory; and what fates attend! 
In heavenly panoply divinely bright 
Thou standa__st, and armies tremble at thy sight, 
As at Achillesa__ self! beneath thy dart 
Lies slain the great Achillesa__ dearer part. 
Thou from the mighty dead those arms hast torn, 
Which once the greatest of mankind had worn. 
Yet live! I give thee one illustrious day, 
A blaze of glory ere thou fada__st away. 
For ah! no more Andromache shall come 
With joyful tears to welcome Hector home; 
No more officious, with endearing charms, 
From thy tired limbs unbrace Pelidesa__ arms!a__ 
Then with his sable brow he gave the nod 
That seals his word; the sanction of the god. 
The stubborn arms (by Jovea__s command disposed) 
Conforma__d spontaneous, and around him closed: 
Filla__d with the god, enlarged his members grew, 
Through all his veins a sudden vigour flew, 
The blood in brisker tides began to roll, 
And Mars himself came rushing on his soul. 
Exhorting loud through all the field he strode, 
And looka__d, and moved, Achilles, or a god. 
Now Mesthles, Glaucus, Medon, he inspires, 
Now Phorcys, Chromius, and Hippothous fires; 
The great Thersilochus like fury found, 
Asteropaeus kindled at the sound, 
And Ennomus, in augury renowna__d. 
a_oeHear, all ye hosts, and hear, unnumbera__d bands 
Of neighbouring nations, or of distant lands! 
a__Twas not for state we summona__d you so far, 
To boast our numbers, and the pomp of war: 
Ye came to fight; a valiant foe to chase, 
To save our present, and our future race. 
Tor this, our wealth, our products, you enjoy, 
And glean the relics of exhausted Troy. 
[pg 318] 
Now then, to conquer or to die prepare; 
To die or conquer are the terms of war. 
Whatever hand shall win Patroclus slain, 
Whoea__er shall drag him to the Trojan train, 
With Hectora__s self shall equal honours claim; 
With Hector part the spoil, and share the fame.a__ 
Fired by his words, the troops dismiss their fears, 
They join, they thicken, they protend their spears; 
Full on the Greeks they drive in firm array, 
And each from Ajax hopes the glorious prey: 
Vain hope! what numbers shall the field oa__erspread, 
What victims perish round the mighty dead! 
Great Ajax marka__d the growing storm from far, 
And thus bespoke his brother of the war: 
a_oeOur fatal day, alas! is come, my friend; 
And all our wars and glories at an end! 
a__Tis not this corse alone we guard in vain, 
Condemna__d to vultures on the Trojan plain; 
We too must yield: the same sad fate must fall 
On thee, on me, perhaps, my friend, on all. 
See what a tempest direful Hector spreads, 
And lo! it bursts, it thunders on our heads! 
Call on our Greeks, if any hear the call, 
The bravest Greeks: this hour demands them all.a__ 
The warrior raised his voice, and wide around 
The field re-echoed the distressful sound. 
a_oeO chiefs! O princes, to whose hand is given 
The rule of men; whose glory is from heaven! 
Whom with due honours both Atrides grace: 
Ye guides and guardians of our Argive race! 
All, whom this well-known voice shall reach from far, 
All, whom I see not through this cloud of war; 
Come all! let generous rage your arms employ, 
And save Patroclus from the dogs of Troy.a__ 
Oilean Ajax first the voice obeya__d, 
Swift was his pace, and ready was his aid: 
Next him Idomeneus, more slow with age, 
And Merion, burning with a heroa__s rage. 
The long-succeeding numbers who can name? 
But all were Greeks, and eager all for fame. 
Fierce to the charge great Hector led the throng; 
Whole Troy embodied rusha__d with shouts along. 
Thus, when a mountain billow foams and raves, 
Where some swoln river disembogues his waves, 
Full in the mouth is stoppa__d the rushing tide, 
The boiling ocean works from side to side, 
The river trembles to his utmost shore, 
And distant rocks re-bellow to the roar. 
Nor less resolved, the firm Achaian band 
With brazen shields in horrid circle stand. 
[pg 319] 
Jove, pouring darkness oa__er the mingled fight, 
Conceals the warriorsa__ shining helms in night: 
To him, the chief for whom the hosts contend 
Had lived not hateful, for he lived a friend: 
Dead he protects him with superior care. 
Nor dooms his carcase to the birds of air. 
Illustration: FIGHT FOR THE BODY OF PATROCLUS. 
FIGHT FOR THE BODY OF PATROCLUS. 
The first attack the Grecians scarce sustain, 
Repulsed, they yield; the Trojans seize the slain. 
Then fierce they rally, to revenge led on 
By the swift rage of Ajax Telamon. 
(Ajax to Peleusa__ son the second name, 
In graceful stature next, and next in fame) 
With headlong force the foremost ranks he tore; 
So through the thicket bursts the mountain boar, 
And rudely scatters, for a distance round, 
The frighted hunter and the baying hound. 
The son of Lethus, brave Pelasgusa__ heir, 
Hippothous, dragga__d the carcase through the war; 
The sinewy ankles bored, the feet he bound 
With thongs inserted through the double wound: 
Inevitable fate oa__ertakes the deed; 
Dooma__d by great Ajaxa__ vengeful lance to bleed: 
It cleft the helmeta__s brazen cheeks in twain; 
The shattera__d crest and horse-hair strow the plain: 
With nerves relaxa__d he tumbles to the ground: 
The brain comes gushing through the ghastly wound: 
He drops Patroclusa__ foot, and oa__er him spread, 
Now lies a sad companion of the dead: 
Far from Larissa lies, his native air, 
And ill requites his parentsa__ tender care. 
Lamented youth! in lifea__s first bloom he fell, 
[pg 320] 
Sent by great Ajax to the shades of hell. 
Once more at Ajax Hectora__s javelin flies; 
The Grecian marking, as it cut the skies, 
Shunna__d the descending death; which hissing on, 
Stretcha__d in the dust the great Iphytusa__ son, 
Schedius the brave, of all the Phocian kind 
The boldest warrior and the noblest mind: 
In little Panope, for strength renowna__d, 
He held his seat, and ruled the realms around. 
Plunged in his throat, the weapon drank his blood, 
And deep transpiercing through the shoulder stood; 
In clanging arms the hero fell and all 
The fields resounded with his weighty fall. 
Phorcys, as slain Hippothous he defends, 
The Telamonian lance his belly rends; 
The hollow armour burst before the stroke, 
And through the wound the rushing entrails broke: 
In strong convulsions panting on the sands 
He lies, and grasps the dust with dying hands. 
Struck at the sight, recede the Trojan train: 
The shouting Argives strip the heroes slain. 
And now had Troy, by Greece compella__d to yield, 
Fled to her ramparts, and resigna__d the field; 
Greece, in her native fortitude elate, 
With Jove averse, had turna__d the scale of fate: 
But Phoebus urged A_neas to the fight; 
He seema__d like aged Periphas to sight: 
(A herald in Anchisesa__ love grown old, 
Revered for prudence, and with prudence bold.) 
Thus hea_"a_oeWhat methods yet, O chief! remain, 
To save your Troy, though heaven its fall ordain? 
There have been heroes, who, by virtuous care, 
By valour, numbers, and by arts of war, 
Have forced the powers to spare a sinking state, 
And gaina__d at length the glorious odds of fate: 
But you, when fortune smiles, when Jove declares 
His partial favour, and assists your wars, 
Your shameful efforts a__gainst yourselves employ, 
And force the unwilling god to ruin Troy.a__ 
A_neas through the form assumed descries 
The power conceala__d, and thus to Hector cries: 
a_oeOh lasting shame! to our own fears a prey, 
We seek our ramparts, and desert the day. 
A god, nor is he less, my bosom warms, 
And tells me, Jove asserts the Trojan arms.a__ 
He spoke, and foremost to the combat flew: 
The bold example all his hosts pursue. 
Then, first, Leocritus beneath him bled, 
In vain beloved by valiant Lycomede; 
Who viewa__d his fall, and, grieving at the chance, 
Swift to revenge it sent his angry lance; 
[pg 321] 
The whirling lance, with vigorous force addressa__d, 
Descends, and pants in Apisaona__s breast; 
From rich Paeoniaa__s vales the warrior came, 
Next thee, Asteropeus! in place and fame. 
Asteropeus with grief beheld the slain, 
And rusha__d to combat, but he rusha__d in vain: 
Indissolubly firm, around the dead, 
Rank within rank, on buckler buckler spread, 
And hemma__d with bristled spears, the Grecians stood, 
A brazen bulwark, and an iron wood. 
Great Ajax eyes them with incessant care, 
And in an orb contracts the crowded war, 
Close in their ranks commands to fight or fall, 
And stands the centre and the soul of all: 
Fixa__d on the spot they war, and wounded, wound 
A sanguine torrent steeps the reeking ground: 
On heaps the Greeks, on heaps the Trojans bled, 
And, thickening round them, rise the hills of dead. 
Greece, in close order, and collected might, 
Yet suffers least, and sways the wavering fight; 
Fierce as conflicting fires the combat burns, 
And now it rises, now it sinks by turns. 
In one thick darkness all the fight was lost; 
The sun, the moon, and all the ethereal host 
Seema__d as extinct: day ravisha__d from their eyes, 
And all heavena__s splendours blotted from the skies. 
Such oa__er Patroclusa__ body hung the night, 
The rest in sunshine fought, and open light; 
Unclouded there, the aerial azure spread, 
No vapour rested on the mountaina__s head, 
The golden sun poura__d forth a stronger ray, 
And all the broad expansion flamed with day. 
Dispersed around the plain, by fits they fight, 
And here and there their scattera__d arrows light: 
But death and darkness oa__er the carcase spread, 
There burna__d the war, and there the mighty bled. 
Meanwhile the sons of Nestor, in the rear, 
(Their fellows routed,) toss the distant spear, 
And skirmish wide: so Nestor gave command, 
When from the ships he sent the Pylian band. 
The youthful brothers thus for fame contend, 
Nor knew the fortune of Achillesa__ friend; 
In thought they viewa__d him still, with martial joy, 
Glorious in arms, and dealing death to Troy. 
But round the corse the heroes pant for breath, 
And thick and heavy grows the work of death: 
Oa__erlaboura__d now, with dust, and sweat, and gore, 
Their knees, their legs, their feet, are covered oa__er; 
Drops follow drops, the clouds on clouds arise, 
And carnage clogs their hands, and darkness fills their eyes. 
[pg 322] 
As when a slaughtera__d bulla__s yet reeking hide, 
Straina__d with full force, and tugga__d from side to side, 
The brawny curriers stretch; and labour oa__er 
The extended surface, drunk with fat and gore: 
So tugging round the corse both armies stood; 
The mangled body bathed in sweat and blood; 
While Greeks and Ilians equal strength employ, 
Now to the ships to force it, now to Troy. 
Not Pallasa__ self, her breast when fury warms, 
Nor he whose anger sets the world in arms, 
Could blame this scene; such rage, such horror reigna__d; 
Such, Jove to honour the great dead ordaina__d. 
Achilles in his ships at distance lay, 
Nor knew the fatal fortune of the day; 
He, yet unconscious of Patroclusa__ fall, 
In dust extended under Iliona__s wall, 
Expects him glorious from the conquered plain, 
And for his wisha__d return prepares in vain; 
Though well he knew, to make proud Ilion bend 
Was more than heaven had destined to his friend. 
Perhaps to him: this Thetis had reveala__d; 
The rest, in pity to her son, conceala__d. 
Still raged the conflict round the hero dead, 
And heaps on heaps by mutual wounds they bled. 
a_oeCursed be the man (even private Greeks would say) 
Who dares desert this well-disputed day! 
First may the cleaving earth before our eyes 
Gape wide, and drink our blood for sacrifice; 
First perish all, ere haughty Troy shall boast 
We lost Patroclus, and our glory lost!a__ 
Thus they: while with one voice the Trojans said, 
a_oeGrant this day, Jove! or heap us on the dead!a__ 
Then clash their sounding arms; the clangours rise, 
And shake the brazen concave of the skies. 
Meantime, at distance from the scene of blood, 
The pensive steeds of great Achilles stood: 
Their godlike master slain before their eyes, 
They wept, and shared in human miseries.248 
[pg 323] 
In vain Automedon now shakes the rein, 
Now plies the lash, and soothes and threats in vain; 
Nor to the fight nor Hellespont they go, 
Restive they stood, and obstinate in woe: 
Still as a tombstone, never to be moved, 
On some good man or woman unreproved 
Lays its eternal weight; or fixa__d, as stands 
A marble courser by the sculptora__s hands, 
Placed on the heroa__s grave. Along their face 
The big round drops coursed down with silent pace, 
Conglobing on the dust. Their manes, that late 
Circled their arched necks, and waved in state, 
Traila__d on the dust beneath the yoke were spread, 
And prone to earth was hung their languid head: 
Nor Jove disdaina__d to cast a pitying look, 
While thus relenting to the steeds he spoke: 
a_oeUnhappy coursers of immortal strain, 
Exempt from age, and deathless, now in vain; 
Did we your race on mortal man bestow, 
Only, alas! to share in mortal woe? 
For ah! what is there of inferior birth, 
That breathes or creeps upon the dust of earth; 
What wretched creature of what wretched kind, 
Than man more weak, calamitous, and blind? 
A miserable race! but cease to mourn: 
For not by you shall Priama__s son be borne 
High on the splendid car: one glorious prize 
He rashly boasts: the rest our will denies. 
Ourself will swiftness to your nerves impart, 
Ourself with rising spirits swell your heart. 
Automedon your rapid flight shall bear 
Safe to the navy through the storm of war. 
For yet a__tis given to Troy to ravage oa__er 
The field, and spread her slaughters to the shore; 
The sun shall see her conquer, till his fall 
With sacred darkness shades the face of all.a__ 
He said; and breathing in the immortal horse 
Excessive spirit, urged them to the course; 
From their high manes they shake the dust, and bear 
The kindling chariot through the parted war: 
So flies a vulture through the clamorous train 
Of geese, that scream, and scatter round the plain. 
From danger now with swiftest speed they flew, 
And now to conquest with like speed pursue; 
Sole in the seat the charioteer remains, 
Now plies the javelin, now directs the reins: 
Him brave Alcimedon beheld distressa__d, 
Approacha__d the chariot, and the chief addressa__d: 
a_oeWhat god provokes thee rashly thus to dare, 
Alone, unaided, in the thickest war? 
[pg 324] 
Alas! thy friend is slain, and Hector wields 
Achillesa__ arms triumphant in the fields.a__ 
a_oeIn happy time (the charioteer replies) 
The bold Alcimedon now greets my eyes; 
No Greek like him the heavenly steeds restrains, 
Or holds their fury in suspended reins: 
Patroclus, while he lived, their rage could tame, 
But now Patroclus is an empty name! 
To thee I yield the seat, to thee resign 
The ruling charge: the task of fight be mine.a__ 
He said. Alcimedon, with active heat, 
Snatches the reins, and vaults into the seat. 
His friend descends. The chief of Troy descried, 
And calla__d A_neas fighting near his side. 
a_oeLo, to my sight, beyond our hope restored, 
Achillesa__ car, deserted of its lord! 
The glorious steeds our ready arms invite, 
Scarce their weak drivers guide them through the fight. 
Can such opponents stand when we assail? 
Unite thy force, my friend, and we prevail.a__ 
The son of Venus to the counsel yields; 
Then oa__er their backs they spread their solid shields: 
With brass refulgent the broad surface shined, 
And thick bull-hides the spacious concave lined. 
Them Chromius follows, Aretus succeeds; 
Each hopes the conquest of the lofty steeds: 
In vain, brave youths, with glorious hopes ye burn, 
In vain advance! not fated to return. 
Unmova__d, Automedon attends the fight, 
Implores the Eternal, and collects his might. 
Then turning to his friend, with dauntless mind: 
a_oeOh keep the foaming coursers close behind! 
Full on my shoulders let their nostrils blow, 
For hard the fight, determined is the foe; 
a__Tis Hector comes: and when he seeks the prize, 
War knows no mean; he wins it or he dies.a__ 
Then through the field he sends his voice aloud, 
And calls the Ajaces from the warring crowd, 
With great Atrides. a_oeHither turn, (he said,) 
Turn where distress demands immediate aid; 
The dead, encircled by his friends, forego, 
And save the living from a fiercer foe. 
Unhelpa__d we stand, unequal to engage 
The force of Hector, and A_neasa__ rage: 
Yet mighty as they are, my force to prove 
Is only mine: the event belongs to Jove.a__ 
He spoke, and high the sounding javelin flung, 
Which passa__d the shield of Aretus the young: 
It pierced his belt, embossa__d with curious art, 
Then in the lower belly struck the dart. 
[pg 325] 
As when a ponderous axe, descending full, 
Cleaves the broad forehead of some brawny bull:249 
Struck a__twixt the horns, he springs with many a bound, 
Then tumbling rolls enormous on the ground: 
Thus fell the youth; the air his soul received, 
And the spear trembled as his entrails heaved. 
Now at Automedon the Trojan foe 
Discharged his lance; the meditated blow, 
Stooping, he shunna__d; the javelin idly fled, 
And hissa__d innoxious oa__er the heroa__s head; 
Deep rooted in the ground, the forceful spear 
In long vibrations spent its fury there. 
With clashing falchions now the chiefs had closed, 
But each brave Ajax heard, and interposed; 
Nor longer Hector with his Trojans stood, 
But left their slain companion in his blood: 
His arms Automedon divests, and cries, 
a_oeAccept, Patroclus, this mean sacrifice: 
Thus have I soothed my griefs, and thus have paid, 
Poor as it is, some offering to thy shade.a__ 
So looks the lion oa__er a mangled boar, 
All grim with rage, and horrible with gore; 
High on the chariot at one bound he sprung, 
And oa__er his seat the bloody trophies hung. 
And now Minerva from the realms of air 
Descends impetuous, and renews the war; 
For, pleased at length the Grecian arms to aid, 
The lord of thunders sent the blue-eyed maid. 
As when high Jove denouncing future woe, 
Oa__er the dark clouds extends his purple bow, 
(In sign of tempests from the troubled air, 
Or from the rage of man, destructive war,) 
The drooping cattle dread the impending skies, 
And from his half-tilla__d field the labourer flies: 
In such a form the goddess round her drew 
A livid cloud, and to the battle flew. 
Assuming Phoenixa__ shape on earth she falls, 
And in his well-known voice to Sparta calls: 
a_oeAnd lies Achillesa__ friend, beloved by all, 
A prey to dogs beneath the Trojan wall? 
What shame a__o Greece for future times to tell, 
To thee the greatest in whose cause he fell!a__ 
a_oeO chief, O father! (Atreusa__ son replies) 
O full of days! by long experience wise! 
What more desires my soul, than here unmoved 
To guard the body of the man I loved? 
[pg 326] 
Ah, would Minerva send me strength to rear 
This wearied arm, and ward the storm of war! 
But Hector, like the rage of fire, we dread, 
And Jovea__s own glories blaze around his head!a__ 
Pleased to be first of all the powers addressa__d, 
She breathes new vigour in her heroa__s breast, 
And fills with keen revenge, with fell despite, 
Desire of blood, and rage, and lust of fight. 
So burns the vengeful hornet (soul all oa__er), 
Repulsed in vain, and thirsty still of gore; 
(Bold son of air and heat) on angry wings 
Untamed, untired, he turns, attacks, and stings. 
Fired with like ardour fierce Atrides flew, 
And sent his soul with every lance he threw. 
There stood a Trojan, not unknown to fame, 
Aetiona__s son, and Podes was his name: 
With riches honoura__d, and with courage blessa__d, 
By Hector loved, his comrade, and his guest; 
Through his broad belt the spear a passage found, 
And, ponderous as he falls, his arms resound. 
Sudden at Hectora__s side Apollo stood, 
Like Phaenops, Asiusa__ son, appeara__d the god; 
(Asius the great, who held his wealthy reign 
In fair Abydos, by the rolling main.) 
a_oeOh prince! (he cried) Oh foremost once in fame! 
What Grecian now shall tremble at thy name? 
Dost thou at length to Menelaus yield, 
A chief once thought no terror of the field? 
Yet singly, now, the long-disputed prize 
He bears victorious, while our army flies: 
By the same arm illustrious Podes bled; 
The friend of Hector, unrevenged, is dead!a__ 
This heard, oa__er Hector spreads a cloud of woe, 
Rage lifts his lance, and drives him on the foe. 
But now the Eternal shook his sable shield, 
That shaded Ide and all the subject field 
Beneath its ample verge. A rolling cloud 
Involved the mount; the thunder roara__d aloud; 
The affrighted hills from their foundations nod, 
And blaze beneath the lightnings of the god: 
At one regard of his all-seeing eye 
The vanquisha__d triumph, and the victors fly. 
Then trembled Greece: the flight Peneleus led; 
For as the brave Boeotian turna__d his head 
To face the foe, Polydamas drew near, 
And razed his shoulder with a shortena__d spear: 
By Hector wounded, Leitus quits the plain, 
Pierced through the wrist; and raging with the pain, 
Grasps his once formidable lance in vain. 
As Hector followa__d, Idomen addressa__d 
[pg 327] 
The flaming javelin to his manly breast; 
The brittle point before his corslet yields; 
Exulting Troy with clamour fills the fields: 
High on his chariots the Cretan stood, 
The son of Priam whirla__d the massive wood. 
But erring from its aim, the impetuous spear 
Struck to the dust the squire and charioteer 
Of martial Merion: Coeranus his name, 
Who left fair Lyctus for the fields of fame. 
On foot bold Merion fought; and now laid low, 
Had graced the triumphs of his Trojan foe, 
But the brave squire the ready coursers brought, 
And with his life his mastera__s safety bought. 
Between his cheek and ear the weapon went, 
The teeth it shattera__d, and the tongue it rent. 
Prone from the seat he tumbles to the plain; 
His dying hand forgets the falling rein: 
This Merion reaches, bending from the car, 
And urges to desert the hopeless war: 
Idomeneus consents; the lash applies; 
And the swift chariot to the navy flies. 
Not Ajax less the will of heaven descried, 
And conquest shifting to the Trojan side, 
Turna__d by the hand of Jove. Then thus begun, 
To Atreusa__s seed, the godlike Telamon: 
a_oeAlas! who sees not Jovea__s almighty hand 
Transfers the glory to the Trojan band? 
Whether the weak or strong discharge the dart, 
He guides each arrow to a Grecian heart: 
Not so our spears; incessant though they rain, 
He suffers every lance to fall in vain. 
Deserted of the god, yet let us try 
What human strength and prudence can supply; 
If yet this honoura__d corse, in triumph borne, 
May glad the fleets that hope not our return, 
Who tremble yet, scarce rescued from their fates, 
And still hear Hector thundering at their gates. 
Some hero too must be despatcha__d to bear 
The mournful message to Pelidesa__ ear; 
For sure he knows not, distant on the shore, 
His friend, his loved Patroclus, is no more. 
But such a chief I spy not through the host: 
The men, the steeds, the armies, all are lost 
In general darknessa_"Lord of earth and air! 
Oh king! Oh father! hear my humble prayer: 
Dispel this cloud, the light of heaven restore; 
Give me to see, and Ajax asks no more: 
If Greece must perish, we thy will obey, 
But let us perish in the face of day!a__ 
With tears the hero spoke, and at his prayer 
[pg 328] 
The god relenting cleara__d the clouded air; 
Forth burst the sun with all-enlightening ray; 
The blaze of armour flasha__d against the day. 
a_oeNow, now, Atrides! cast around thy sight; 
If yet Antilochus survives the fight, 
Let him to great Achillesa__ ear convey 
The fatal newsa__a_"Atrides hastes away. 
So turns the lion from the nightly fold, 
Though high in courage, and with hunger bold, 
Long galla__d by herdsmen, and long vexa__d by hounds, 
Stiff with fatigue, and fretted sore with wounds; 
The darts fly round him from a hundred hands, 
And the red terrors of the blazing brands: 
Till late, reluctant, at the dawn of day 
Sour he departs, and quits the untasted prey, 
So moved Atrides from his dangerous place 
With weary limbs, but with unwilling pace; 
The foe, he feara__d, might yet Patroclus gain, 
And much admonisha__d, much adjured his train: 
a_oeO guard these relics to your charge consigna__d, 
And bear the merits of the dead in mind; 
How skilla__d he was in each obliging art; 
The mildest manners, and the gentlest heart: 
He was, alas! but fate decreed his end, 
In death a hero, as in life a friend!a__ 
So parts the chief; from rank to rank he flew, 
And round on all sides sent his piercing view. 
As the bold bird, endued with sharpest eye 
Of all that wings the mid aerial sky, 
The sacred eagle, from his walks above 
Looks down, and sees the distant thicket move; 
Then stoops, and sousing on the quivering hare, 
Snatches his life amid the clouds of air. 
Not with less quickness, his exerted sight 
Passa__d this and that way, through the ranks of fight: 
Till on the left the chief he sought, he found, 
Cheering his men, and spreading deaths around: 
To him the king: a_oeBeloved of Jove! draw near, 
For sadder tidings never toucha__d thy ear; 
Thy eyes have witnessa__d what a fatal turn! 
How Ilion triumphs, and the Achaians mourn. 
This is not all: Patroclus, on the shore 
Now pale and dead, shall succour Greece no more. 
Fly to the fleet, this instant fly, and tell 
The sad Achilles, how his loved-one fell: 
He too may haste the naked corse to gain: 
The arms are Hectora__s, who despoila__d the slain.a__ 
The youthful warrior heard with silent woe, 
From his fair eyes the tears began to flow: 
Big with the mighty grief, he strove to say 
[pg 329] 
What sorrow dictates, but no word found way. 
To brave Laodocus his arms he flung, 
Who, near him wheeling, drove his steeds along; 
Then ran the mournful message to impart, 
With tearful eyes, and with dejected heart. 
Swift fled the youth: nor Menelaus stands 
(Though sore distressa__d) to aid the Pylian bands; 
But bids bold Thrasymede those troops sustain; 
Himself returns to his Patroclus slain. 
a_oeGone is Antilochus (the hero said); 
But hope not, warriors, for Achillesa__ aid: 
Though fierce his rage, unbounded be his woe, 
Unarma__d, he fights not with the Trojan foe. 
a__Tis in our hands alone our hopes remain, 
a__Tis our own vigour must the dead regain, 
And save ourselves, while with impetuous hate 
Troy pours along, and this way rolls our fate.a__ 
a_oea__Tis well (said Ajax), be it then thy care, 
With Meriona__s aid, the weighty corse to rear; 
Myself, and my bold brother will sustain 
The shock of Hector and his charging train: 
Nor fear we armies, fighting side by side; 
What Troy can dare, we have already tried, 
Have tried it, and have stood.a__ The hero said. 
High from the ground the warriors heave the dead. 
A general clamour rises at the sight: 
Loud shout the Trojans, and renew the fight. 
Not fiercer rush along the gloomy wood, 
With rage insatiate, and with thirst of blood, 
Voracious hounds, that many a length before 
Their furious hunters, drive the wounded boar; 
But if the savage turns his glaring eye, 
They howl aloof, and round the forest fly. 
Thus on retreating Greece the Trojans pour, 
Wave their thick falchions, and their javelins shower: 
But Ajax turning, to their fears they yield, 
All pale they tremble and forsake the field. 
While thus aloft the heroa__s corse they bear, 
Behind them rages all the storm of war: 
Confusion, tumult, horror, oa__er the throng 
Of men, steeds, chariots, urged the rout along: 
Less fierce the winds with rising flames conspire 
To whelm some city under waves of fire; 
Now sink in gloomy clouds the proud abodes, 
Now crack the blazing temples of the gods; 
The rumbling torrent through the ruin rolls, 
And sheets of smoke mount heavy to the poles. 
The heroes sweat beneath their honoura__d load: 
As when two mules, along the rugged road, 
From the steep mountain with exerted strength 
[pg 330] 
Drag some vast beam, or masta__s unwieldy length; 
Inly they groan, big drops of sweat distil, 
The enormous timber lumbering down the hill: 
So thesea_"Behind, the bulk of Ajax stands, 
And breaks the torrent of the rushing bands. 
Thus when a river swella__d with sudden rains 
Spreads his broad waters oa__er the level plains, 
Some interposing hill the stream divides. 
And breaks its force, and turns the winding tides. 
Still close they follow, close the rear engage; 
Aeneas storms, and Hector foams with rage: 
While Greece a heavy, thick retreat maintains, 
Wedged in one body, like a flight of cranes, 
That shriek incessant, while the falcon, hung 
High on poised pinions, threats their callow young. 
So from the Trojan chiefs the Grecians fly, 
Such the wild terror, and the mingled cry: 
Within, without the trench, and all the way, 
Strowa__d in bright heaps, their arms and armour lay; 
Such horror Jove impressa__d! yet still proceeds 
The work of death, and still the battle bleeds. 
Illustration: VULCAN FROM AN ANTIQUE GEM. 
VULCAN FROM AN ANTIQUE GEM. 
[pg 331] 
BOOK XVIII. 
ARGUMENT. 
THE GRIEF OF ACHILLES, AND NEW ARMOUR MADE HIM BY VULCAN. 
The news of the death of Patroclus is brought to Achilles by 
Antilochus. Thetis, hearing his lamentations, comes with all her sea- 
nymphs to comfort him. The speeches of the mother and son on this 
occasion. Iris appears to Achilles by the command of Juno, and orders 
him to show himself at the head of the intrenchments. The sight of him 
turns the fortunes of the day, and the body of Patroclus is carried off 
by the Greeks. The Trojans call a council, where Hector and Polydamas 
disagree in their opinions: but the advice of the former prevails, to 
remain encamped in the field. The grief of Achilles over the body of 
Patroclus. 
Thetis goes to the palace of Vulcan to obtain new arms for her son. The 
description of the wonderful works of Vulcan: and, lastly, that noble 
one of the shield of Achilles. 
The latter part of the nine-and-twentieth day, and the night ensuing, 
take up this book: the scene is at Achillesa__ tent on the sea-shore, 
from whence it changes to the palace of Vulcan. 
Thus like the rage of fire the combat burns,250 
And now it rises, now it sinks by turns. 
Meanwhile, where Hellesponta__s broad waters flow, 
Stood Nestora__s son, the messenger of woe: 
There sat Achilles, shaded by his sails, 
On hoisted yards extended to the gales; 
Pensive he sat; for all that fate designa__d 
Rose in sad prospect to his boding mind. 
Thus to his soul he said: a_oeAh! what constrains 
The Greeks, late victors, now to quit the plains? 
Is this the day, which heaven so long ago 
Ordaina__d, to sink me with the weight of woe? 
(So Thetis warna__d;) when by a Trojan hand 
The bravest of the Myrmidonian band 
Should lose the light! Fulfilled is that decree; 
Fallen is the warrior, and Patroclus he! 
In vain I charged him soon to quit the plain, 
And warna__d to shun Hectorean force in vain!a__ 
[pg 332] 
Thus while he thinks, Antilochus appears, 
And tells the melancholy tale with tears. 
a_oeSad tidings, son of Peleus! thou must hear; 
And wretched I, the unwilling messenger! 
Dead is Patroclus! For his corse they fight; 
His naked corse: his arms are Hectora__s right.a__ 
A sudden horror shot through all the chief, 
And wrappa__d his senses in the cloud of grief; 
Cast on the ground, with furious hands he spread 
The scorching ashes oa__er his graceful head; 
His purple garments, and his golden hairs, 
Those he deforms with dust, and these he tears; 
On the hard soil his groaning breast he threw, 
And rolla__d and grovella__d, as to earth he grew. 
The virgin captives, with disordera__d charms, 
(Won by his own, or by Patroclusa__ arms,) 
Rusha__d from their tents with cries; and gathering round, 
Beat their white breasts, and fainted on the ground: 
While Nestora__s son sustains a manlier part, 
And mourns the warrior with a warriora__s heart; 
Hangs on his arms, amidst his frantic woe, 
And oft prevents the meditated blow. 
Far in the deep abysses of the main,251 
With hoary Nereus, and the watery train, 
The mother-goddess from her crystal throne 
Heard his loud cries, and answera__d groan for groan. 
The circling Nereids with their mistress weep, 
And all the sea-green sisters of the deep. 
Thalia, Glauce (every watery name), 
Nesaea mild, and silver Spio came: 
Cymothoe and Cymodoce were nigh, 
And the blue languish of soft Aliaa__s eye. 
Their locks Actaea and Limnoria rear, 
Then Proto, Doris, Panope appear, 
Thoa, Pherusa, Doto, Melita; 
Agave gentle, and Amphithoe gay: 
Next Callianira, Callianassa show 
Their sister looks; Dexamene the slow, 
And swift Dynamene, now cut the tides: 
Iaera now the verdant wave divides: 
Nemertes with Apseudes lifts the head, 
Bright Galatea quits her pearly bed; 
These Orythia, Clymene, attend, 
Maera, Amphinome, the train extend; 
And black Janira, and Janassa fair, 
And Amatheia with her amber hair. 
All these, and all that deep in ocean held 
Their sacred seats, the glimmering grotto filla__d; 
[pg 333] 
Each beat her ivory breast with silent woe, 
Till Thetisa__ sorrows thus began to flow: 
a_oeHear me, and judge, ye sisters of the main! 
How just a cause has Thetis to complain! 
How wretched, were I mortal, were my fate! 
How more than wretched in the immortal state! 
Sprung from my bed a godlike hero came, 
The bravest far that ever bore the name; 
Like some fair olive, by my careful hand 
He grew, he flourisha__d and adorna__d the land 
To Troy I sent him: but the fates ordain 
He never, never must return again. 
So short a space the light of heaven to view, 
So short, alas! and filla__d with anguish too! 
Hear how his sorrows echo through the shore! 
I cannot ease them, but I must deplore; 
I go at least to bear a tender part, 
And mourn my loved-one with a mothera__s heart.a__ 
She said, and left the caverns of the main, 
All bathed in tears; the melancholy train 
Attend her way. Wide-opening part the tides, 
While the long pomp the silver wave divides. 
Approaching now, they toucha__d the Trojan land; 
Then, two by two, ascended up the strand. 
The immortal mother, standing close beside 
Her mournful offspring, to his sighs replied; 
Along the coast their mingled clamours ran, 
And thus the silver-footed dame began: 
a_oeWhy mourns my son? thy late preferra__d request 
The god has granted, and the Greeks distressa__d: 
Why mourns my son? thy anguish let me share, 
Reveal the cause, and trust a parenta__s care.a__ 
He, deeply groaninga_"a_oeTo this cureless grief, 
Not even the Thunderera__s favour brings relief. 
Patroclusa_"Ah!a_"say, goddess, can I boast 
A pleasure now? revenge itself is lost; 
Patroclus, loved of all my martial train, 
Beyond mankind, beyond myself is slain! 
Lost are those arms the gods themselves bestowa__d 
On Peleus; Hector bears the glorious load. 
Cursed be that day, when all the powers above 
Thy charms submitted to a mortal love: 
O hadst thou still, a sister of the main, 
Pursued the pleasures of the watery reign: 
And happier Peleus, less ambitious, led 
A mortal beauty to his equal bed! 
Ere the sad fruit of thy unhappy womb 
Had caused such sorrows past, and woes to come. 
For soon, alas! that wretched offspring slain, 
New woes, new sorrows, shall create again. 
[pg 334] 
a__Tis not in fate the alternate now to give; 
Patroclus dead, Achilles hates to live. 
Let me revenge it on proud Hectora__s heart, 
Let his last spirit smoke upon my dart; 
On these conditions will I breathe: till then, 
I blush to walk among the race of men.a__ 
A flood of tears, at this, the goddess shed: 
a_oeAh then, I see thee dying, see thee dead! 
When Hector falls, thou diest.a__a_"a_oeLet Hector die, 
And let me fall! (Achilles made reply) 
Far lies Patroclus from his native plain! 
He fell, and falling, wisha__d my aid in vain. 
Ah then, since from this miserable day 
I cast all hope of my return away; 
Since, unrevenged, a hundred ghosts demand 
The fate of Hector from Achillesa__ hand; 
Since here, for brutal courage far renowna__d, 
I live an idle burden to the ground, 
(Others in council famed for nobler skill, 
More useful to preserve, than I to kill,) 
Let mea_"But oh! ye gracious powers above! 
Wrath and revenge from men and gods remove: 
Far, far too dear to every mortal breast, 
Sweet to the soul, as honey to the taste: 
Gathering like vapours of a noxious kind 
From fiery blood, and darkening all the mind. 
Me Agamemnon urged to deadly hate; 
a__Tis pasta_"I quell it; I resign to fate. 
Yesa_"I will meet the murderer of my friend; 
Or (if the gods ordain it) meet my end. 
The stroke of fate the strongest cannot shun: 
The great Alcides, Jovea__s unequalla__d son, 
To Junoa__s hate, at length resigna__d his breath, 
And sunk the victim of all-conquering death. 
So shall Achilles fall! stretcha__d pale and dead, 
No more the Grecian hope, or Trojan dread! 
Let me, this instant, rush into the fields, 
And reap what glory lifea__s short harvest yields. 
Shall I not force some widowa__d dame to tear 
With frantic hands her long dishevella__d hair? 
Shall I not force her breast to heave with sighs, 
And the soft tears to trickle from her eyes? 
Yes, I shall give the fair those mournful charmsa_" 
In vain you hold mea_"Hence! my arms! my arms!a_" 
Soon shall the sanguine torrent spread so wide, 
That all shall know Achilles swells the tide.a__ 
a_oeMy son (coerulean Thetis made reply, 
To fate submitting with a secret sigh,) 
The host to succour, and thy friends to save, 
Is worthy thee; the duty of the brave. 
[pg 335] 
But canst thou, naked, issue to the plains? 
Thy radiant arms the Trojan foe detains. 
Insulting Hector bears the spoils on high, 
But vainly glories, for his fate is nigh. 
Yet, yet awhile thy generous ardour stay; 
Assured, I meet thee at the dawn of day, 
Charged with refulgent arms (a glorious load), 
Vulcanian arms, the labour of a god.a__ 
Then turning to the daughters of the main, 
The goddess thus dismissa__d her azure train: 
a_oeYe sister Nereids! to your deeps descend; 
Haste, and our fathera__s sacred seat attend; 
I go to find the architect divine, 
Where vast Olympusa__ starry summits shine: 
So tell our hoary sirea__a_"This charge she gave: 
The sea-green sisters plunge beneath the wave: 
Thetis once more ascends the blessa__d abodes, 
And treads the brazen threshold of the gods. 
Illustration: THETIS ORDERING THE NEREIDS TO DESCEND INTO THE SEA. 
THETIS ORDERING THE NEREIDS TO DESCEND INTO THE SEA. 
And now the Greeks from furious Hectora__s force, 
Urge to broad Hellespont their headlong course; 
Nor yet their chiefs Patroclusa__ body bore 
Safe through the tempest to the tented shore. 
The horse, the foot, with equal fury joina__d, 
Poura__d on the rear, and thundera__d close behind: 
And like a flame through fields of ripena__d corn, 
The rage of Hector oa__er the ranks was borne. 
Thrice the slain hero by the foot he drew; 
Thrice to the skies the Trojan clamours flew: 
As oft the Ajaces his assault sustain; 
[pg 336] 
But checka__d, he turns; repulsa__d, attacks again. 
With fiercer shouts his lingering troops he fires, 
Nor yields a step, nor from his post retires: 
So watchful shepherds strive to force, in vain, 
The hungry lion from a carcase slain. 
Even yet Patroclus had he borne away, 
And all the glories of the extended day, 
Had not high Juno from the realms of air, 
Secret, despatcha__d her trusty messenger. 
The various goddess of the showery bow, 
Shot in a whirlwind to the shore below; 
To great Achilles at his ships she came, 
And thus began the many-coloura__d dame: 
a_oeRise, son of Peleus! rise, divinely brave! 
Assist the combat, and Patroclus save: 
For him the slaughter to the fleet they spread, 
And fall by mutual wounds around the dead. 
To drag him back to Troy the foe contends: 
Nor with his death the rage of Hector ends: 
A prey to dogs he dooms the corse to lie, 
And marks the place to fix his head on high. 
Rise, and prevent (if yet you think of fame) 
Thy frienda__s disgrace, thy own eternal shame!a__ 
a_oeWho sends thee, goddess, from the ethereal skies?a__ 
Achilles thus. And Iris thus replies: 
a_oeI come, Pelides! from the queen of Jove, 
The immortal empress of the realms above; 
Unknown to him who sits remote on high, 
Unknown to all the synod of the sky.a__ 
a_oeThou comest in vain (he cries, with fury warma__d); 
Arms I have none, and can I fight unarma__d? 
Unwilling as I am, of force I stay, 
Till Thetis bring me at the dawn of day 
Vulcanian arms: what other can I wield, 
Except the mighty Telamonian shield? 
That, in my frienda__s defence, has Ajax spread, 
While his strong lance around him heaps the dead: 
The gallant chief defends Menoetiusa__ son, 
And does what his Achilles should have done.a__ 
a_oeThy want of arms (said Iris) well we know; 
But though unarma__d, yet clad in terrors, go! 
Let but Achilles oa__er yon trench appear, 
Proud Troy shall tremble, and consent to fear; 
Greece from one glance of that tremendous eye 
Shall take new courage, and disdain to fly.a__ 
She spoke, and passa__d in air. The hero rose: 
Her aegis Pallas oa__er his shoulder throws; 
Around his brows a golden cloud she spread; 
A stream of glory flamed above his head. 
As when from some beleaguera__d town arise 
[pg 337] 
The smokes, high curling to the shaded skies; 
(Seen from some island, oa__er the main afar, 
When men distressa__d hang out the sign of war;) 
Soon as the sun in ocean hides his rays, 
Thick on the hills the flaming beacons blaze; 
With long-projected beams the seas are bright, 
And heavena__s high arch reflects the ruddy light: 
So from Achillesa__ head the splendours rise, 
Reflecting blaze on blaze against the skies. 
Forth marcha__d the chief, and distant from the crowd, 
High on the rampart raised his voice aloud; 
With her own shout Minerva swells the sound; 
Troy starts astonisha__d, and the shores rebound. 
As the loud trumpeta__s brazen mouth from far 
With shrilling clangour sounds the alarm of war, 
Struck from the walls, the echoes float on high, 
And the round bulwarks and thick towers reply; 
So high his brazen voice the hero reara__d: 
Hosts droppa__d their arms, and trembled as they heard: 
And back the chariots roll, and coursers bound, 
And steeds and men lie mingled on the ground. 
Aghast they see the living lightnings play, 
And turn their eyeballs from the flashing ray. 
Thrice from the trench his dreadful voice he raised, 
And thrice they fled, confounded and amazed. 
Twelve in the tumult wedged, untimely rusha__d 
On their own spears, by their own chariots crusha__d: 
While, shielded from the darts, the Greeks obtain 
The long-contended carcase of the slain. 
A lofty bier the breathless warrior bears: 
Around, his sad companions melt in tears. 
But chief Achilles, bending down his head, 
Pours unavailing sorrows oa__er the dead, 
Whom late triumphant, with his steeds and car, 
He sent refulgent to the field of war; 
(Unhappy change!) now senseless, pale, he found, 
Stretcha__d forth, and gasha__d with many a gaping wound. 
Meantime, unwearied with his heavenly way, 
In oceana__s waves the unwilling light of day 
Quencha__d his red orb, at Junoa__s high command, 
And from their labours eased the Achaian band. 
The frighted Trojans (panting from the war, 
Their steeds unharnessa__d from the weary car) 
A sudden council calla__d: each chief appeara__d 
In haste, and standing; for to sit they feara__d. 
a__Twas now no season for prolonga__d debate; 
They saw Achilles, and in him their fate. 
Silent they stood: Polydamas at last, 
Skilla__d to discern the future by the past, 
The son of Panthus, thus expressa__d his fears 
[pg 338] 
(The friend of Hector, and of equal years; 
The self-same night to both a being gave, 
One wise in council, one in action brave): 
Illustration: JUNO COMMANDING THE SUN TO SET. 
JUNO COMMANDING THE SUN TO SET. 
a_oeIn free debate, my friends, your sentence speak; 
For me, I move, before the morning break, 
To raise our camp: too dangerous here our post, 
Far from Troy walls, and on a naked coast. 
I deema__d not Greece so dreadful, while engaged 
In mutual feuds her king and hero raged; 
Then, while we hoped our armies might prevail 
We boldly campa__d beside a thousand sail. 
I dread Pelides now: his rage of mind 
Not long continues to the shores confined, 
Nor to the fields, where long in equal fray 
Contending nations won and lost the day; 
For Troy, for Troy, shall henceforth be the strife, 
And the hard contest not for fame, but life. 
Haste then to Ilion, while the favouring night 
Detains these terrors, keeps that arm from fight. 
If but the morrowa__s sun behold us here, 
That arm, those terrors, we shall feel, not fear; 
And hearts that now disdain, shall leap with joy, 
If heaven permit them then to enter Troy. 
Let not my fatal prophecy be true, 
Nor what I tremble but to think, ensue. 
Whatever be our fate, yet let us try 
What force of thought and reason can supply; 
Let us on counsel for our guard depend; 
The town her gates and bulwarks shall defend. 
[pg 339] 
When morning dawns, our well-appointed powers, 
Arraya__d in arms, shall line the lofty towers. 
Let the fierce hero, then, when fury calls, 
Vent his mad vengeance on our rocky walls, 
Or fetch a thousand circles round the plain, 
Till his spent coursers seek the fleet again: 
So may his rage be tired, and laboura__d down! 
And dogs shall tear him ere he sack the town.a__ 
a_oeReturn! (said Hector, fired with stern disdain) 
What! coop whole armies in our walls again? 
Wasa__t not enough, ye valiant warriors, say, 
Nine years imprisona__d in those towers ye lay? 
Wide oa__er the world was Ilion famed of old 
For brass exhaustless, and for mines of gold: 
But while inglorious in her walls we staya__d, 
Sunk were her treasures, and her stores decaya__d; 
The Phrygians now her scattera__d spoils enjoy, 
And proud Maeonia wastes the fruits of Troy. 
Great Jove at length my arms to conquest calls, 
And shuts the Grecians in their wooden walls, 
Darest thou dispirit whom the gods incite? 
Flies any Trojan? I shall stop his flight. 
To better counsel then attention lend; 
Take due refreshment, and the watch attend. 
If there be one whose riches cost him care, 
Forth let him bring them for the troops to share; 
a__Tis better generously bestowa__d on those, 
Than left the plunder of our countrya__s foes. 
Soon as the morn the purple orient warms, 
Fierce on yon navy will we pour our arms. 
If great Achilles rise in all his might, 
His be the danger: I shall stand the fight. 
Honour, ye gods! or let me gain or give; 
And live he glorious, whosoea__er shall live! 
Mars is our common lord, alike to all; 
And oft the victor triumphs, but to fall.a__ 
The shouting host in loud applauses joina__d; 
So Pallas robba__d the many of their mind; 
To their own sense condemna__d, and left to choose 
The worst advice, the better to refuse. 
While the long night extends her sable reign, 
Around Patroclus mourna__d the Grecian train. 
Stern in superior grief Pelides stood; 
Those slaughtering arms, so used to bathe in blood, 
Now clasp his clay-cold limbs: then gushing start 
The tears, and sighs burst from his swelling heart. 
The lion thus, with dreadful anguish stung, 
Roars through the desert, and demands his young; 
When the grim savage, to his rifled den 
Too late returning, snuffs the track of men, 
[pg 340] 
And oa__er the vales and oa__er the forest bounds; 
His clamorous grief the bellowing wood resounds. 
So grieves Achilles; and, impetuous, vents 
To all his Myrmidons his loud laments. 
a_oeIn what vain promise, gods! did I engage, 
When to console Menoetiusa__ feeble age, 
I vowed his much-loved offspring to restore, 
Charged with rich spoils, to fair Opuntiaa__s shore?252 
But mighty Jove cuts short, with just disdain, 
The long, long views of poor designing man! 
One fate the warrior and the friend shall strike, 
And Troya__s black sands must drink our blood alike: 
Me too a wretched mother shall deplore, 
An aged father never see me more! 
Yet, my Patroclus! yet a space I stay, 
Then swift pursue thee on the darksome way. 
Ere thy dear relics in the grave are laid, 
Shall Hectora__s head be offera__d to thy shade; 
That, with his arms, shall hang before thy shrine; 
And twelve, the noblest of the Trojan line, 
Sacred to vengeance, by this hand expire; 
Their lives effused around thy flaming pyre. 
Thus let me lie till then! thus, closely pressa__d, 
Bathe thy cold face, and sob upon thy breast! 
While Trojan captives here thy mourners stay, 
Weep all the night and murmur all the day: 
Spoils of my arms, and thine; when, wasting wide, 
Our swords kept time, and conquera__d side by side.a__ 
He spoke, and bade the sad attendants round 
Cleanse the pale corse, and wash each honoura__d wound. 
A massy caldron of stupendous frame 
They brought, and placed it oa__er the rising flame: 
Then heapa__d the lighted wood; the flame divides 
Beneath the vase, and climbs around the sides: 
In its wide womb they pour the rushing stream; 
The boiling water bubbles to the brim. 
The body then they bathe with pious toil, 
Embalm the wounds, anoint the limbs with oil, 
High on a bed of state extended laid, 
And decent covera__d with a linen shade; 
Last oa__er the dead the milk-white veil they threw; 
That done, their sorrows and their sighs renew. 
Meanwhile to Juno, in the realms above, 
(His wife and sister,) spoke almighty Jove. 
a_oeAt last thy will prevails: great Peleusa__ son 
Rises in arms: such grace thy Greeks have won. 
Say (for I know not), is their race divine, 
And thou the mother of that martial line?a__ 
a_oeWhat words are these? (the imperial dame replies, 
[pg 341] 
While anger flasha__d from her majestic eyes) 
Succour like this a mortal arm might lend, 
And such success mere human wit attend: 
And shall not I, the second power above, 
Heavena__s queen, and consort of the thundering Jove, 
Say, shall not I one nationa__s fate command, 
Not wreak my vengeance on one guilty land?a__ 
Illustration: TRIPOD. 
TRIPOD. 
So they. Meanwhile the silver-footed dame 
Reacha__d the Vulcanian dome, eternal frame! 
High-eminent amid the works divine, 
Where heavena__s far-beaming brazen mansions shine. 
There the lame architect the goddess found, 
Obscure in smoke, his forges flaming round, 
While bathed in sweat from fire to fire he flew; 
And puffing loud, the roaring billows blew. 
That day no common task his labour claima__d: 
Full twenty tripods for his hall he framed, 
That placed on living wheels of massy gold, 
(Wondrous to tell,) instinct with spirit rolla__d 
From place to place, around the blessa__d abodes 
Self-moved, obedient to the beck of gods: 
For their fair handles now, oa__erwrought with flowers, 
In moulds prepared, the glowing ore he pours. 
Just as responsive to his thought the frame 
Stood prompt to move, the azure goddess came: 
Charis, his spouse, a grace divinely fair, 
(With purple fillets round her braided hair,) 
Observed her entering; her soft hand she pressa__d, 
And, smiling, thus the watery queen addressa__d: 
a_oeWhat, goddess! this unusual favour draws? 
All hail, and welcome! whatsoea__er the cause; 
[pg 342] 
Till now a stranger, in a happy hour 
Approach, and taste the dainties of the bower.a__ 
Illustration: THETIS AND EURYNOME RECEIVING THE INFANT VULCAN. 
THETIS AND EURYNOME RECEIVING THE INFANT VULCAN. 
High on a throne, with stars of silver graced, 
And various artifice, the queen she placed; 
A footstool at her feet: then calling, said, 
a_oeVulcan, draw near, a__tis Thetis asks your aid.a__ 
a_oeThetis (replied the god) our powers may claim, 
An ever-dear, an ever-honoura__d name! 
When my proud mother hurla__d me from the sky, 
(My awkward form, it seems, displeased her eye,) 
She, and Eurynome, my griefs redressa__d, 
And soft received me on their silver breast. 
Even then these arts employa__d my infant thought: 
Chains, bracelets, pendants, all their toys, I wrought. 
Nine years kept secret in the dark abode, 
Secure I lay, conceala__d from man and god: 
Deep in a caverna__d rock my days were led; 
The rushing ocean murmura__d oa__er my head. 
Now, since her presence glads our mansion, say, 
For such desert what service can I pay? 
Vouchsafe, O Thetis! at our board to share 
The genial rites, and hospitable fare; 
While I the labours of the forge forego, 
And bid the roaring bellows cease to blow.a__ 
Then from his anvil the lame artist rose; 
Wide with distorted legs oblique he goes, 
And stills the bellows, and (in order laid) 
Locks in their chests his instruments of trade. 
Then with a sponge the sooty workman dressa__d 
[pg 343] 
His brawny arms embrowna__d, and hairy breast. 
With his huge sceptre graced, and red attire, 
Came halting forth the sovereign of the fire: 
The monarcha__s steps two female forms uphold, 
That moved and breathed in animated gold; 
To whom was voice, and sense, and science given 
Of works divine (such wonders are in heaven!) 
On these supported, with unequal gait, 
He reacha__d the throne where pensive Thetis sate; 
There placed beside her on the shining frame, 
He thus addressa__d the silver-footed dame: 
a_oeThee, welcome, goddess! what occasion calls 
(So long a stranger) to these honoura__d walls? 
a__Tis thine, fair Thetis, the command to lay, 
And Vulcana__s joy and duty to obey.a__ 
Illustration: VULCAN AND CHARIS RECEIVING THETIS. 
VULCAN AND CHARIS RECEIVING THETIS. 
To whom the mournful mother thus replies: 
(The crystal drops stood trembling in her eyes:) 
a_oeO Vulcan! say, was ever breast divine 
So pierced with sorrows, so oa__erwhelma__d as mine? 
Of all the goddesses, did Jove prepare 
For Thetis only such a weight of care? 
I, only I, of all the watery race 
By force subjected to a mana__s embrace, 
Who, sinking now with age and sorrow, pays 
The mighty fine imposed on length of days. 
Sprung from my bed, a godlike hero came, 
The bravest sure that ever bore the name; 
Like some fair plant beneath my careful hand 
He grew, he flourisha__d, and he graced the land: 
[pg 344] 
To Troy I sent him! but his native shore 
Never, ah never, shall receive him more; 
(Even while he lives, he wastes with secret woe;) 
Nor I, a goddess, can retard the blow! 
Robba__d of the prize the Grecian suffrage gave, 
The king of nations forced his royal slave: 
For this he grieved; and, till the Greeks oppressa__d 
Required his arm, he sorrowa__d unredressa__d. 
Large gifts they promise, and their elders send; 
In vaina_"he arms not, but permits his friend 
His arms, his steeds, his forces to employ: 
He marches, combats, almost conquers Troy: 
Then slain by Phoebus (Hector had the name) 
At once resigns his armour, life, and fame. 
But thou, in pity, by my prayer be won: 
Grace with immortal arms this short-lived son, 
And to the field in martial pomp restore, 
To shine with glory, till he shines no more!a__ 
To her the artist-god: a_oeThy griefs resign, 
Secure, what Vulcan can, is ever thine. 
O could I hide him from the Fates, as well, 
Or with these hands the cruel stroke repel, 
As I shall forge most envied arms, the gaze 
Of wondering ages, and the worlda__s amaze!a__ 
Thus having said, the father of the fires 
To the black labours of his forge retires. 
Soon as he bade them blow, the bellows turna__d 
Their iron mouths; and where the furnace burna__d, 
Resounding breathed: at once the blast expires, 
And twenty forges catch at once the fires; 
Just as the god directs, now loud, now low, 
They raise a tempest, or they gently blow; 
In hissing flames huge silver bars are rolla__d, 
And stubborn brass, and tin, and solid gold; 
Before, deep fixa__d, the eternal anvils stand; 
The ponderous hammer loads his better hand, 
His left with tongs turns the vexa__d metal round, 
And thick, strong strokes, the doubling vaults rebound. 
Then first he forma__d the immense and solid shield; 
Rich various artifice emblazed the field; 
Its utmost verge a threefold circle bound;253 
[pg 345] 
A silver chain suspends the massy round; 
Five ample plates the broad expanse compose, 
And godlike labours on the surface rose. 
There shone the image of the master-mind: 
There earth, there heaven, there ocean he designa__d; 
The unwearied sun, the moon completely round; 
The starry lights that heavena__s high convex crowna__d; 
The Pleiads, Hyads, with the northern team; 
And great Oriona__s more refulgent beam; 
To which, around the axle of the sky, 
The Bear, revolving, points his golden eye, 
Still shines exalted on the ethereal plain, 
Nor bathes his blazing forehead in the main. 
Two cities radiant on the shield appear, 
The image one of peace, and one of war. 
Here sacred pomp and genial feast delight, 
And solemn dance, and hymeneal rite; 
Along the street the new-made brides are led, 
With torches flaming, to the nuptial bed: 
The youthful dancers in a circle bound 
To the soft flute, and citherna__s silver sound: 
Through the fair streets the matrons in a row 
Stand in their porches, and enjoy the show. 
There in the forum swarm a numerous train; 
The subject of debate, a townsman slain: 
One pleads the fine discharged, which one denied, 
And bade the public and the laws decide: 
The witness is produced on either hand: 
For this, or that, the partial people stand: 
The appointed heralds still the noisy bands, 
And form a ring, with sceptres in their hands: 
On seats of stone, within the sacred place,254 
The reverend elders nodded oa__er the case; 
Alternate, each the attesting sceptre took, 
And rising solemn, each his sentence spoke 
Two golden talents lay amidst, in sight, 
The prize of him who best adjudged the right. 
Another part (a prospect differing far)255 
Glowa__d with refulgent arms, and horrid war. 
[pg 346] 
Two mighty hosts a leaguera__d town embrace, 
And one would pillage, one would burn the place. 
Meantime the townsmen, arma__d with silent care, 
A secret ambush on the foe prepare: 
Their wives, their children, and the watchful band 
Of trembling parents, on the turrets stand. 
They march; by Pallas and by Mars made bold: 
Gold were the gods, their radiant garments gold, 
And gold their armour: these the squadron led, 
August, divine, superior by the head! 
A place for ambush fit they found, and stood, 
Covera__d with shields, beside a silver flood. 
Two spies at distance lurk, and watchful seem 
If sheep or oxen seek the winding stream. 
Soon the white flocks proceeded oa__er the plains, 
And steers slow-moving, and two shepherd swains; 
Behind them piping on their reeds they go, 
Nor fear an ambush, nor suspect a foe. 
In arms the glittering squadron rising round 
Rush sudden; hills of slaughter heap the ground; 
Whole flocks and herds lie bleeding on the plains, 
And, all amidst them, dead, the shepherd swains! 
The bellowing oxen the besiegers hear; 
They rise, take horse, approach, and meet the war, 
They fight, they fall, beside the silver flood; 
The waving silver seema__d to blush with blood. 
There Tumult, there Contention stood confessa__d; 
One reara__d a dagger at a captivea__s breast; 
One held a living foe, that freshly bled 
With new-made wounds; another dragga__d a dead; 
Now here, now there, the carcases they tore: 
Fate stalka__d amidst them, grim with human gore. 
And the whole war came out, and met the eye; 
And each bold figure seema__d to live or die. 
A field deep furrowa__d next the god designa__d,256 
[pg 347] 
The third time laboura__d by the sweating hind; 
The shining shares full many ploughmen guide, 
And turn their crooked yokes on every side. 
Still as at either end they wheel around, 
The master meets them with his goblet crowna__d; 
The hearty draught rewards, renews their toil, 
Then back the turning ploughshares cleave the soil: 
Behind, the rising earth in ridges rolla__d; 
And sable looka__d, though forma__d of molten gold. 
Another field rose high with waving grain; 
With bended sickles stand the reaper train: 
Here stretched in ranks the levella__d swarths are found, 
Sheaves heapa__d on sheaves here thicken up the ground. 
With sweeping stroke the mowers strow the lands; 
The gatherers follow, and collect in bands; 
And last the children, in whose arms are borne 
(Too short to gripe them) the brown sheaves of corn. 
The rustic monarch of the field descries, 
With silent glee, the heaps around him rise. 
A ready banquet on the turf is laid, 
Beneath an ample oaka__s expanded shade. 
The victim ox the sturdy youth prepare; 
The reapera__s due repast, the womana__s care. 
Next, ripe in yellow gold, a vineyard shines, 
Bent with the ponderous harvest of its vines; 
A deeper dye the dangling clusters show, 
And curla__d on silver props, in order glow: 
A darker metal mixa__d intrencha__d the place; 
And pales of glittering tin the inclosure grace. 
To this, one pathway gently winding leads, 
Where march a train with baskets on their heads, 
(Fair maids and blooming youths,) that smiling bear 
The purple product of the autumnal year. 
To these a youth awakes the warbling strings, 
Whose tender lay the fate of Linus sings; 
In measured dance behind him move the train, 
Tune soft the voice, and answer to the strain. 
Here herds of oxen march, erect and bold, 
Rear high their horns, and seem to low in gold, 
And speed to meadows on whose sounding shores 
A rapid torrent through the rushes roars: 
Four golden herdsmen as their guardians stand, 
And nine sour dogs complete the rustic band. 
Two lions rushing from the wood appeara__d; 
And seized a bull, the master of the herd: 
He roara__d: in vain the dogs, the men withstood; 
They tore his flesh, and drank his sable blood. 
[pg 348] 
The dogs (oft cheera__d in vain) desert the prey, 
Dread the grim terrors, and at distance bay. 
Next this, the eye the art of Vulcan leads 
Deep through fair forests, and a length of meads, 
And stalls, and folds, and scattera__d cots between; 
And fleecy flocks, that whiten all the scene. 
A figured dance succeeds; such once was seen 
In lofty Gnossus for the Cretan queen, 
Forma__d by Daedalean art; a comely band 
Of youths and maidens, bounding hand in hand. 
The maids in soft simars of linen dressa__d; 
The youths all graceful in the glossy vest: 
Of those the locks with flowery wreath inrolla__d; 
Of these the sides adorna__d with swords of gold, 
That glittering gay, from silver belts depend. 
Now all at once they rise, at once descend, 
With well-taught feet: now shape in oblique ways, 
Confusedly regular, the moving maze: 
Now forth at once, too swift for sight, they spring, 
And undistinguisha__d blend the flying ring: 
So whirls a wheel, in giddy circle tossa__d, 
And, rapid as it runs, the single spokes are lost. 
The gazing multitudes admire around: 
Two active tumblers in the centre bound; 
Now high, now low, their pliant limbs they bend: 
And general songs the sprightly revel end. 
Thus the broad shield complete the artist crowna__d 
With his last hand, and poura__d the ocean round: 
In living silver seema__d the waves to roll, 
And beat the bucklera__s verge, and bound the whole. 
This done, whatea__er a warriora__s use requires 
He forged; the cuirass that outshone the fires, 
The greaves of ductile tin, the helm impressa__d 
With various sculpture, and the golden crest. 
At Thetisa__ feet the finished labour lay: 
She, as a falcon cuts the aerial way, 
Swift from Olympusa__ snowy summit flies, 
And bears the blazing present through the skies.257 
[pg 349] 
BOOK XIX. 
ARGUMENT. 
THE RECONCILIATION OF ACHILLES AND AGAMEMNON. 
Thetis brings to her son the armour made by Vulcan. She preserves the 
body of his friend from corruption, and commands him to assemble the 
army, to declare his resentment at an end. Agamemnon and Achilles are 
solemnly reconciled: the speeches, presents, and ceremonies on that 
occasion. Achilles is with great difficulty persuaded to refrain from 
the battle till the troops have refreshed themselves by the advice of 
Ulysses. The presents are conveyed to the tent of Achilles, where 
Briseis laments over the body of Patroclus. The hero obstinately 
refuses all repast, and gives himself up to lamentations for his 
friend. Minerva descends to strengthen him, by the order of Jupiter. He 
arms for the fight: his appearance described. He addresses himself to 
his horses, and reproaches them with the death of Patroclus. One of 
them is miraculously endued with voice, and inspired to prophesy his 
fate: but the hero, not astonished by that prodigy, rushes with fury to 
the combat. 
The thirteenth day. The scene is on the sea-shore. 
Soon as Aurora heaved her Orient head 
Above the waves, that blusha__d with early red, 
(With new-born day to gladden mortal sight, 
And gild the courts of heaven with sacred light,) 
The immortal arms the goddess-mother bears 
Swift to her son: her son she finds in tears 
Stretcha__d oa__er Patroclusa__ corse; while all the rest 
Their sovereigna__s sorrows in their own expressa__d. 
A ray divine her heavenly presence shed, 
And thus, his hand soft touching, Thetis said: 
a_oeSuppress, my son, this rage of grief, and know 
It was not man, but heaven, that gave the blow; 
Behold what arms by Vulcan are bestowa__d, 
Arms worthy thee, or fit to grace a god.a__ 
Then drops the radiant burden on the ground; 
Clang the strong arms, and ring the shores around; 
Back shrink the Myrmidons with dread surprise, 
And from the broad effulgence turn their eyes. 
Unmoved the hero kindles at the show, 
And feels with rage divine his bosom glow; 
[pg 350] 
From his fierce eyeballs living flames expire, 
And flash incessant like a stream of fire: 
He turns the radiant gift: and feeds his mind 
On all the immortal artist had designa__d. 
a_oeGoddess! (he cried,) these glorious arms, that shine 
With matchless art, confess the hand divine. 
Now to the bloody battle let me bend: 
But ah! the relics of my slaughtera__d friend! 
In those wide wounds through which his spirit fled, 
Shall flies, and worms obscene, pollute the dead?a__ 
a_oeThat unavailing care be laid aside, 
(The azure goddess to her son replied,) 
Whole years untoucha__d, uninjured shall remain, 
Fresh as in life, the carcase of the slain. 
But go, Achilles, as affairs require, 
Before the Grecian peers renounce thine ire: 
Then uncontrolla__d in boundless war engage, 
And heaven with strength supply the mighty rage!a__ 
Illustration: THETIS BRINGING THE ARMOUR TO ACHILLES. 
THETIS BRINGING THE ARMOUR TO ACHILLES. 
Then in the nostrils of the slain she poura__d 
Nectareous drops, and rich ambrosia showera__d 
Oa__er all the corse. The flies forbid their prey, 
Untoucha__d it rests, and sacred from decay. 
Achilles to the strand obedient went: 
The shores resounded with the voice he sent. 
The heroes heard, and all the naval train 
That tend the ships, or guide them oa__er the main, 
Alarma__d, transported, at the well-known sound, 
Frequent and full, the great assembly crowna__d; 
Studious to see the terror of the plain, 
Long lost to battle, shine in arms again. 
[pg 351] 
Tydides and Ulysses first appear, 
Lame with their wounds, and leaning on the spear; 
These on the sacred seats of council placed, 
The king of men, Atrides, came the last: 
He too sore wounded by Agenora__s son. 
Achilles (rising in the midst) begun: 
a_oeO monarch! better far had been the fate 
Of thee, of me, of all the Grecian state, 
If (ere the day when by mad passion swaya__d, 
Rash we contended for the black-eyed maid) 
Preventing Dian had despatcha__d her dart, 
And shot the shining mischief to the heart! 
Then many a hero had not pressa__d the shore, 
Nor Troya__s glad fields been fattena__d with our gore. 
Long, long shall Greece the woes we caused bewail, 
And sad posterity repeat the tale. 
But this, no more the subject of debate, 
Is past, forgotten, and resigna__d to fate. 
Why should, alas, a mortal man, as I, 
Burn with a fury that can never die? 
Here then my anger ends: let war succeed, 
And even as Greece has bled, let Ilion bleed. 
Now call the hosts, and try if in our sight 
Troy yet shall dare to camp a second night! 
I deem, their mightiest, when this arm he knows, 
Shall a__scape with transport, and with joy repose.a__ 
He said: his finisha__d wrath with loud acclaim 
The Greeks accept, and shout Pelidesa__ name. 
When thus, not rising from his lofty throne, 
In state unmoved, the king of men begun: 
a_oeHear me, ye sons of Greece! with silence hear! 
And grant your monarch an impartial ear: 
Awhile your loud, untimely joy suspend, 
And let your rash, injurious clamours end: 
Unruly murmurs, or ill-timed applause, 
Wrong the best speaker, and the justest cause. 
Nor charge on me, ye Greeks, the dire debate: 
Know, angry Jove, and all-compelling Fate, 
With fell Erinnys, urged my wrath that day 
When from Achillesa__ arms I forced the prey. 
What then could I against the will of heaven? 
Not by myself, but vengeful Ate driven; 
She, Jovea__s dread daughter, fated to infest 
The race of mortals, entera__d in my breast. 
Not on the ground that haughty fury treads, 
But prints her lofty footsteps on the heads 
Of mighty men; inflicting as she goes 
Long-festering wounds, inextricable woes! 
Of old, she stalka__d amid the bright abodes; 
And Jove himself, the sire of men and gods, 
[pg 352] 
The worlda__s great ruler, felt her venoma__d dart; 
Deceived by Junoa__s wiles, and female art: 
For when Alcmenaa__s nine long months were run, 
And Jove expected his immortal son, 
To gods and goddesses the unruly joy 
He showa__d, and vaunted of his matchless boy: 
a__From us, (he said) this day an infant springs, 
Fated to rule, and born a king of kings.a__ 
Saturnia aska__d an oath, to vouch the truth, 
And fix dominion on the favoura__d youth. 
The Thunderer, unsuspicious of the fraud, 
Pronounced those solemn words that bind a god. 
The joyful goddess, from Olympusa__ height, 
Swift to Achaian Argos bent her flight: 
Scarce seven moons gone, lay Sthenelusa__s wife; 
She pusha__d her lingering infant into life: 
Her charms Alcmenaa__s coming labours stay, 
And stop the babe, just issuing to the day. 
Then bids Saturnius bear his oath in mind; 
a__A youth (said she) of Jovea__s immortal kind 
Is this day born: from Sthenelus he springs, 
And claims thy promise to be king of kings.a__ 
Grief seized the Thunderer, by his oath engaged; 
Stung to the soul, he sorrowa__d, and he raged. 
From his ambrosial head, where percha__d she sate, 
He snatcha__d the fury-goddess of debate, 
The dread, the irrevocable oath he swore, 
The immortal seats should nea__er behold her more; 
And whirla__d her headlong down, for ever driven 
From bright Olympus and the starry heaven: 
Thence on the nether world the fury fell; 
Ordaina__d with mana__s contentious race to dwell. 
Full oft the god his sona__s hard toils bemoana__d, 
Cursed the dire fury, and in secret groana__d.258 
Even thus, like Jove himself, was I misled, 
While raging Hector heapa__d our camps with dead. 
What can the errors of my rage atone? 
My martial troops, my treasures are thy own: 
This instant from the navy shall be sent 
Whatea__er Ulysses promised at thy tent: 
But thou! appeased, propitious to our prayer, 
Resume thy arms, and shine again in war.a__ 
a_oeO king of nations! whose superior sway 
[pg 353] 
(Returns Achilles) all our hosts obey! 
To keep or send the presents, be thy care; 
To us, a__tis equal: all we ask is war. 
While yet we talk, or but an instant shun 
The fight, our glorious work remains undone. 
Let every Greek, who sees my spear confound 
The Trojan ranks, and deal destruction round, 
With emulation, what I act survey, 
And learn from thence the business of the day. 
The son of Peleus thus; and thus replies 
The great in councils, Ithacus the wise: 
a_oeThough, godlike, thou art by no toils oppressa__d, 
At least our armies claim repast and rest: 
Long and laborious must the combat be, 
When by the gods inspired, and led by thee. 
Strength is derived from spirits and from blood, 
And those augment by generous wine and food: 
What boastful son of war, without that stay, 
Can last a hero through a single day? 
Courage may prompt; but, ebbing out his strength, 
Mere unsupported man must yield at length; 
Shrunk with dry famine, and with toils declined, 
The drooping body will desert the mind: 
But built anew with strength-conferring fare, 
With limbs and soul untamed, he tires a war. 
Dismiss the people, then, and give command. 
With strong repast to hearten every band; 
But let the presents to Achilles made, 
In full assembly of all Greece be laid. 
The king of men shall rise in public sight, 
And solemn swear (observant of the rite) 
That, spotless, as she came, the maid removes, 
Pure from his arms, and guiltless of his loves. 
That done, a sumptuous banquet shall be made, 
And the full price of injured honour paid. 
Stretch not henceforth, O prince.! thy sovereign might 
Beyond the bounds of reason and of right; 
a__Tis the chief praise that ea__er to kings belonga__d, 
To right with justice whom with power they wronga__d.a__ 
To him the monarch: a_oeJust is thy decree, 
Thy words give joy, and wisdom breathes in thee. 
Each due atonement gladly I prepare; 
And heaven regard me as I justly swear! 
Here then awhile let Greece assembled stay, 
Nor great Achilles grudge this short delay. 
Till from the fleet our presents be conveya__d, 
And Jove attesting, the firm compact made. 
A train of noble youths the charge shall bear; 
These to select, Ulysses, be thy care: 
In order ranka__d let all our gifts appear, 
[pg 354] 
And the fair train of captives close the rear: 
Talthybius shall the victim boar convey, 
Sacred to Jove, and yon bright orb of day.a__ 
a_oeFor this (the stern A_acides replies) 
Some less important season may suffice, 
When the stern fury of the war is oa__er, 
And wrath, extinguisha__d, burns my breast no more. 
By Hector slain, their faces to the sky, 
All grim with gaping wounds, our heroes lie: 
Those call to war! and might my voice incite, 
Now, now, this instant, shall commence the fight: 
Then, when the daya__s complete, let generous bowls, 
And copious banquets, glad your weary souls. 
Let not my palate know the taste of food, 
Till my insatiate rage be cloya__d with blood: 
Pale lies my friend, with wounds disfigured oa__er, 
And his cold feet are pointed to the door. 
Revenge is all my soul! no meaner care, 
Interest, or thought, has room to harbour there; 
Destruction be my feast, and mortal wounds, 
And scenes of blood, and agonizing sounds.a__ 
a_oeO first of Greeks, (Ulysses thus rejoina__d,) 
The best and bravest of the warrior kind! 
Thy praise it is in dreadful camps to shine, 
But old experience and calm wisdom mine. 
Then hear my counsel, and to reason yield, 
The bravest soon are satiate of the field; 
Though vast the heaps that strow the crimson plain, 
The bloody harvest brings but little gain: 
The scale of conquest ever wavering lies, 
Great Jove but turns it, and the victor dies! 
The great, the bold, by thousands daily fall, 
And endless were the grief, to weep for all. 
Eternal sorrows what avails to shed? 
Greece honours not with solemn fasts the dead: 
Enough, when death demands the brave, to pay 
The tribute of a melancholy day. 
One chief with patience to the grave resigna__d, 
Our care devolves on others left behind. 
Let generous food supplies of strength produce, 
Let rising spirits flow from sprightly juice, 
Let their warm heads with scenes of battle glow, 
And pour new furies on the feebler foe. 
Yet a short interval, and none shall dare 
Expect a second summons to the war; 
Who waits for that, the dire effects shall find, 
If trembling in the ships he lags behind. 
Embodied, to the battle let us bend, 
And all at once on haughty Troy descend.a__ 
And now the delegates Ulysses sent, 
[pg 355] 
To bear the presents from the royal tent: 
The sons of Nestor, Phyleusa__ valiant heir, 
Thias and Merion, thunderbolts of war, 
With Lycomedes of Creiontian strain, 
And Melanippus, forma__d the chosen train. 
Swift as the word was given, the youths obeya__d: 
Twice ten bright vases in the midst they laid; 
A row of six fair tripods then succeeds; 
And twice the number of high-bounding steeds: 
Seven captives next a lovely line compose; 
The eighth Briseis, like the blooming rose, 
Closed the bright band: great Ithacus, before, 
First of the train, the golden talents bore: 
The rest in public view the chiefs dispose, 
A splendid scene! then Agamemnon rose: 
The boar Talthybius held: the Grecian lord 
Drew the broad cutlass sheatha__d beside his sword: 
The stubborn bristles from the victima__s brow 
He crops, and offering meditates his vow. 
His hands uplifted to the attesting skies, 
On heavena__s broad marble roof were fixed his eyes. 
The solemn words a deep attention draw, 
And Greece around sat thrilla__d with sacred awe. 
a_oeWitness thou first! thou greatest power above, 
All-good, all-wise, and all-surveying Jove! 
And mother-earth, and heavena__s revolving light, 
And ye, fell furies of the realms of night, 
Who rule the dead, and horrid woes prepare 
For perjured kings, and all who falsely swear! 
The black-eyed maid inviolate removes, 
Pure and unconscious of my manly loves. 
If this be false, heaven all its vengeance shed, 
And levella__d thunder strike my guilty head!a__ 
With that, his weapon deep inflicts the wound; 
The bleeding savage tumbles to the ground; 
The sacred herald rolls the victim slain 
(A feast for fish) into the foaming main. 
Then thus Achilles: a_oeHear, ye Greeks! and know 
Whatea__er we feel, a__tis Jove inflicts the woe; 
Not else Atrides could our rage inflame, 
Nor from my arms, unwilling, force the dame. 
a__Twas Jovea__s high will alone, oa__erruling all, 
That dooma__d our strife, and dooma__d the Greeks to fall. 
Go then, ye chiefs! indulge the genial rite; 
Achilles waits ye, and expects the fight.a__ 
The speedy council at his word adjourna__d: 
To their black vessels all the Greeks returna__d. 
Achilles sought his tent. His train before 
Marcha__d onward, bending with the gifts they bore. 
Those in the tents the squires industrious spread: 
[pg 356] 
The foaming coursers to the stalls they led; 
To their new seats the female captives move 
Briseis, radiant as the queen of love, 
Slow as she passa__d, beheld with sad survey 
Where, gasha__d with cruel wounds, Patroclus lay. 
Prone on the body fell the heavenly fair, 
Beat her sad breast, and tore her golden hair; 
All beautiful in grief, her humid eyes 
Shining with tears she lifts, and thus she cries: 
a_oeAh, youth for ever dear, for ever kind, 
Once tender friend of my distracted mind! 
I left thee fresh in life, in beauty gay; 
Now find thee cold, inanimated clay! 
What woes my wretched race of life attend! 
Sorrows on sorrows, never dooma__d to end! 
The first loved consort of my virgin bed 
Before these eyes in fatal battle bled: 
My three brave brothers in one mournful day 
All trod the dark, irremeable way: 
Thy friendly hand upreara__d me from the plain, 
And dried my sorrows for a husband slain; 
Achillesa__ care you promised I should prove, 
The first, the dearest partner of his love; 
That rites divine should ratify the band, 
And make me empress in his native land. 
Accept these grateful tears! for thee they flow, 
For thee, that ever felt anothera__s woe!a__ 
Her sister captives echoed groan for groan, 
Nor mourna__d Patroclusa__ fortunes, but their own. 
The leaders pressa__d the chief on every side; 
Unmoved he heard them, and with sighs denied. 
a_oeIf yet Achilles have a friend, whose care 
Is bent to please him, this request forbear; 
Till yonder sun descend, ah, let me pay 
To grief and anguish one abstemious day.a__ 
He spoke, and from the warriors turna__d his face: 
Yet still the brother-kings of Atreusa__ race, 
Nestor, Idomeneus, Ulysses sage, 
And Phoenix, strive to calm his grief and rage: 
His rage they calm not, nor his grief control; 
He groans, he raves, he sorrows from his soul. 
a_oeThou too, Patroclus! (thus his heart he vents) 
Once spread the inviting banquet in our tents: 
Thy sweet society, thy winning care, 
Once staya__d Achilles, rushing to the war. 
But now, alas! to deatha__s cold arms resigna__d, 
What banquet but revenge can glad my mind? 
What greater sorrow could afflict my breast, 
What more if hoary Peleus were deceased? 
Who now, perhaps, in Phthia dreads to hear 
[pg 357] 
His sona__s sad fate, and drops a tender tear. 
What more, should Neoptolemus the brave, 
My only offspring, sink into the grave? 
If yet that offspring lives; (I distant far, 
Of all neglectful, wage a hateful war.) 
I could not this, this cruel stroke attend; 
Fate claima__d Achilles, but might spare his friend. 
I hoped Patroclus might survive, to rear 
My tender orphan with a parenta__s care, 
From Scyrosa__ isle conduct him oa__er the main, 
And glad his eyes with his paternal reign, 
The lofty palace, and the large domain. 
For Peleus breathes no more the vital air; 
Or drags a wretched life of age and care, 
But till the news of my sad fate invades 
His hastening soul, and sinks him to the shades.a__ 
Sighing he said: his grief the heroes joina__d, 
Each stole a tear for what he left behind. 
Their mingled grief the sire of heaven surveya__d, 
And thus with pity to his blue-eyed maid: 
a_oeIs then Achilles now no more thy care, 
And dost thou thus desert the great in war? 
Lo, where yon sails their canvas wings extend, 
All comfortless he sits, and wails his friend: 
Ere thirst and want his forces have oppressa__d, 
Haste and infuse ambrosia in his breast.a__ 
He spoke; and sudden, at the word of Jove, 
Shot the descending goddess from above. 
So swift through ether the shrill harpy springs, 
The wide air floating to her ample wings, 
To great Achilles she her flight addressa__d, 
And poura__d divine ambrosia in his breast,259 
With nectar sweet, (refection of the gods!) 
Then, swift ascending, sought the bright abodes. 
Now issued from the ships the warrior-train, 
And like a deluge poura__d upon the plain. 
As when the piercing blasts of Boreas blow, 
And scatter oa__er the fields the driving snow; 
From dusky clouds the fleecy winter flies, 
Whose dazzling lustre whitens all the skies: 
So helms succeeding helms, so shields from shields, 
Catch the quick beams, and brighten all the fields; 
Broad glittering breastplates, spears with pointed rays, 
Mix in one stream, reflecting blaze on blaze; 
Thick beats the centre as the coursers bound; 
With splendour flame the skies, and laugh the fields around, 
[pg 358] 
Full in the midst, high-towering oa__er the rest, 
His limbs in arms divine Achilles dressa__d; 
Arms which the father of the fire bestowa__d, 
Forged on the eternal anvils of the god. 
Grief and revenge his furious heart inspire, 
His glowing eyeballs roll with living fire; 
He grinds his teeth, and furious with delay 
Oa__erlooks the embattled host, and hopes the bloody day. 
The silver cuishes first his thighs infold; 
Then oa__er his breast was braced the hollow gold; 
The brazen sword a various baldric tied, 
That, starra__d with gems, hung glittering at his side; 
And, like the moon, the broad refulgent shield 
Blazed with long rays, and gleama__d athwart the field. 
So to night-wandering sailors, pale with fears, 
Wide oa__er the watery waste, a light appears, 
Which on the far-seen mountain blazing high, 
Streams from some lonely watch-tower to the sky: 
With mournful eyes they gaze, and gaze again; 
Loud howls the storm, and drives them oa__er the main. 
Next, his high head the helmet graced; behind 
The sweepy crest hung floating in the wind: 
Like the red star, that from his flaming hair 
Shakes down diseases, pestilence, and war; 
So streama__d the golden honours from his head, 
Trembled the sparkling plumes, and the loose glories shed. 
The chief beholds himself with wondering eyes; 
His arms he poises, and his motions tries; 
Buoya__d by some inward force, he seems to swim, 
And feels a pinion lifting every limb. 
And now he shakes his great paternal spear, 
Ponderous and huge, which not a Greek could rear, 
From Peliona__s cloudy top an ash entire 
Old Chiron fella__d, and shaped it for his sire; 
A spear which stern Achilles only wields, 
The death of heroes, and the dread of fields. 
Automedon and Alcimus prepare 
The immortal coursers, and the radiant car; 
(The silver traces sweeping at their side;) 
Their fiery mouths resplendent bridles tied; 
The ivory-studded reins, returna__d behind, 
Waved oa__er their backs, and to the chariot joina__d. 
The charioteer then whirla__d the lash around, 
And swift ascended at one active bound. 
All bright in heavenly arms, above his squire 
Achilles mounts, and sets the field on fire; 
Not brighter Phoebus in the ethereal way 
Flames from his chariot, and restores the day. 
High oa__er the host, all terrible he stands, 
And thunders to his steeds these dread commands: 
[pg 359] 
a_oeXanthus and Balius! of Podargesa__ strain, 
(Unless ye boast that heavenly race in vain,) 
Be swift, be mindful of the load ye bear, 
And learn to make your master more your care: 
Through falling squadrons bear my slaughtering sword, 
Nor, as ye left Patroclus, leave your lord.a__ 
The generous Xanthus, as the words he said, 
Seema__d sensible of woe, and droopa__d his head: 
Trembling he stood before the golden wain, 
And bowa__d to dust the honours of his mane. 
When, strange to tell! (so Juno willa__d) he broke 
Eternal silence, and portentous spoke. 
a_oeAchilles! yes! this day at least we bear 
Thy rage in safety through the files of war: 
But come it will, the fatal time must come, 
Not ours the fault, but God decrees thy doom. 
Not through our crime, or slowness in the course, 
Fell thy Patroclus, but by heavenly force; 
The bright far-shooting god who gilds the day 
(Confessa__d we saw him) tore his arms way. 
Noa_"could our swiftness oa__er the winds prevail, 
Or beat the pinions of the western gale, 
All were in vaina_"the Fates thy death demand, 
Due to a mortal and immortal hand.a__ 
Then ceased for ever, by the Furies tied, 
His fateful voice. The intrepid chief replied 
With unabated ragea_"a_oeSo let it be! 
Portents and prodigies are lost on me. 
I know my fate: to die, to see no more 
My much-loved parents, and my native shorea_" 
Enougha_"when heaven ordains, I sink in night: 
Now perish Troy!a__ He said, and rusha__d to fight. 
Illustration: HERCULES. 
HERCULES. 
[pg 360] 
BOOK XX. 
ARGUMENT. 
THE BATTLE OF THE GODS, AND THE ACTS OF ACHILLES. 
Jupiter, upon Achillesa__ return to the battle, calls a council of the 
gods, and permits them to assist either party. The terrors of the 
combat described, when the deities are engaged. Apollo encourages A_neas 
to meet Achilles. After a long conversation, these two heroes 
encounter; but A_neas is preserved by the assistance of Neptune. 
Achilles falls upon the rest of the Trojans, and is upon the point of 
killing Hector, but Apollo conveys him away in a cloud. Achilles 
pursues the Trojans with a great slaughter. 
The same day continues. The scene is in the field before Troy. 
Thus round Pelides breathing war and blood 
Greece, sheathed in arms, beside her vessels stood; 
While near impending from a neighbouring height, 
Troya__s black battalions wait the shock of fight. 
Then Jove to Themis gives command, to call 
The gods to council in the starry hall: 
Swift oa__er Olympusa__ hundred hills she flies, 
And summons all the senate of the skies. 
These shining on, in long procession come 
To Jovea__s eternal adamantine dome. 
Not one was absent, not a rural power 
That haunts the verdant gloom, or rosy bower; 
Each fair-haira__d dryad of the shady wood, 
Each azure sister of the silver flood; 
All but old Ocean, hoary sire! who keeps 
His ancient seat beneath the sacred deeps. 
On marble thrones, with lucid columns crowna__d, 
(The work of Vulcan,) sat the powers around. 
Even he whose trident sways the watery reign 
Heard the loud summons, and forsook the main, 
Assumed his throne amid the bright abodes, 
And questiona__d thus the sire of men and gods: 
a_oeWhat moves the god who heaven and earth commands, 
And grasps the thunder in his awful hands, 
[pg 361] 
Thus to convene the whole ethereal state? 
Is Greece and Troy the subject in debate? 
Already met, the louring hosts appear, 
And death stands ardent on the edge of war.a__ 
a_oea__Tis true (the cloud-compelling power replies) 
This day we call the council of the skies 
In care of human race; even Jovea__s own eye 
Sees with regret unhappy mortals die. 
Far on Olympusa__ top in secret state 
Ourself will sit, and see the hand of fate 
Work out our will. Celestial powers! descend, 
And as your minds direct, your succour lend 
To either host. Troy soon must lie oa__erthrown, 
If uncontrolla__d Achilles fights alone: 
Their troops but lately durst not meet his eyes; 
What can they now, if in his rage he rise? 
Assist them, gods! or Iliona__s sacred wall 
May fall this day, though fate forbids the fall.a__ 
He said, and fired their heavenly breasts with rage. 
On adverse parts the warring gods engage: 
Heavena__s awful queen; and he whose azure round 
Girds the vast globe; the maid in arms renowna__d; 
Hermes, of profitable arts the sire; 
And Vulcan, the black sovereign of the fire: 
These to the fleet repair with instant flight; 
The vessels tremble as the gods alight. 
In aid of Troy, Latona, Phoebus came, 
Mars fiery-helma__d, the laughter-loving dame, 
Xanthus, whose streams in golden currents flow, 
And the chaste huntress of the silver bow. 
Ere yet the gods their various aid employ, 
Each Argive bosom swella__d with manly joy, 
While great Achilles (terror of the plain), 
Long lost to battle, shone in arms again. 
Dreadful he stood in front of all his host; 
Pale Troy beheld, and seema__d already lost; 
Her bravest heroes pant with inward fear, 
And trembling see another god of war. 
But when the powers descending swella__d the fight, 
Then tumult rose: fierce rage and pale affright 
Varied each face: then Discord sounds alarms, 
Earth echoes, and the nations rush to arms. 
Now through the trembling shores Minerva calls, 
And now she thunders from the Grecian walls. 
Mars hovering oa__er his Troy, his terror shrouds 
In gloomy tempests, and a night of clouds: 
Now through each Trojan heart he fury pours 
With voice divine, from Iliona__s topmost towers: 
Now shouts to Simois, from her beauteous hill; 
The mountain shook, the rapid stream stood still. 
[pg 362] 
Above, the sire of gods his thunder rolls, 
And peals on peals redoubled rend the poles. 
Beneath, stern Neptune shakes the solid ground; 
The forests wave, the mountains nod around; 
Through all their summits tremble Idaa__s woods, 
And from their sources boil her hundred floods. 
Troya__s turrets totter on the rocking plain, 
And the tossa__d navies beat the heaving main. 
Deep in the dismal regions of the dead,260 
The infernal monarch reara__d his horrid head, 
Leapa__d from his throne, lest Neptunea__s arm should lay 
His dark dominions open to the day, 
And pour in light on Plutoa__s drear abodes, 
Abhorra__d by men, and dreadful even to gods.261 
Illustration: THE GODS DESCENDING TO BATTLE. 
THE GODS DESCENDING TO BATTLE. 
Such war the immortals wage; such horrors rend 
The worlda__s vast concave, when the gods contend 
First silver-shafted Phoebus took the plain 
Against blue Neptune, monarch of the main. 
The god of arms his giant bulk displaya__d, 
Opposed to Pallas, wara__s triumphant maid. 
Against Latona marcha__d the son of May. 
The quivera__d Dian, sister of the day, 
(Her golden arrows sounding at her side,) 
[pg 363] 
Saturnia, majesty of heaven, defied. 
With fiery Vulcan last in battle stands 
The sacred flood that rolls on golden sands; 
Xanthus his name with those of heavenly birth, 
But called Scamander by the sons of earth. 
While thus the gods in various league engage, 
Achilles glowa__d with more than mortal rage: 
Hector he sought; in search of Hector turna__d 
His eyes around, for Hector only burna__d; 
And burst like lightning through the ranks, and vowa__d 
To glut the god of battles with his blood. 
A_neas was the first who dared to stay; 
Apollo wedged him in the warriora__s way, 
But swella__d his bosom with undaunted might, 
Half-forced and half-persuaded to the fight. 
Like young Lycaon, of the royal line, 
In voice and aspect, seema__d the power divine; 
And bade the chief reflect, how late with scorn 
In distant threats he braved the goddess-born. 
Then thus the hero of Anchisesa__ strain: 
a_oeTo meet Pelides you persuade in vain: 
Already have I met, nor void of fear 
Observed the fury of his flying spear; 
From Idaa__s woods he chased us to the field, 
Our force he scattered, and our herds he killa__d; 
Lyrnessus, Pedasus in ashes lay; 
But (Jove assisting) I survived the day: 
Else had I sunk oppressa__d in fatal fight 
By fierce Achilles and Minervaa__s might. 
Wherea__er he moved, the goddess shone before, 
And bathed his brazen lance in hostile gore. 
What mortal man Achilles can sustain? 
The immortals guard him through the dreadful plain, 
And suffer not his dart to fall in vain. 
Were God my aid, this arm should check his power, 
Though strong in battle as a brazen tower.a__ 
To whom the son of Jove: a_oeThat god implore, 
And be what great Achilles was before. 
From heavenly Venus thou deriva__st thy strain, 
And he but from a sister of the main; 
An aged sea-god father of his line; 
But Jove himself the sacred source of thine. 
Then lift thy weapon for a noble blow, 
Nor fear the vaunting of a mortal foe.a__ 
This said, and spirit breathed into his breast, 
Through the thick troops the emboldena__d hero pressa__d: 
His venturous act the white-arma__d queen surveya__d, 
And thus, assembling all the powers, she said: 
a_oeBehold an action, gods! that claims your care, 
Lo great A_neas rushing to the war! 
[pg 364] 
Against Pelides he directs his course, 
Phoebus impels, and Phoebus gives him force. 
Restrain his bold career; at least, to attend 
Our favoura__d hero, let some power descend. 
To guard his life, and add to his renown, 
We, the great armament of heaven, came down. 
Hereafter let him fall, as Fates design, 
That spun so short his lifea__s illustrious line:262 
But lest some adverse god now cross his way, 
Give him to know what powers assist this day: 
For how shall mortal stand the dire alarms, 
When heavena__s refulgent host appear in arms?a__263 
Thus she; and thus the god whose force can make 
The solid globea__s eternal basis shake: 
a_oeAgainst the might of man, so feeble known, 
Why should celestial powers exert their own? 
Suffice from yonder mount to view the scene, 
And leave to war the fates of mortal men. 
But if the armipotent, or god of light, 
Obstruct Achilles, or commence the fight. 
Thence on the gods of Troy we swift descend: 
Full soon, I doubt not, shall the conflict end; 
And these, in ruin and confusion hurla__d, 
Yield to our conquering arms the lower world.a__ 
Thus having said, the tyrant of the sea, 
Coerulean Neptune, rose, and led the way. 
Advanced upon the field there stood a mound 
Of earth congested, walla__d, and trencha__d around; 
In elder times to guard Alcides made, 
(The work of Trojans, with Minervaa__s aid,) 
What time a vengeful monster of the main 
Swept the wide shore, and drove him to the plain. 
Here Neptune and the gods of Greece repair, 
With clouds encompassa__d, and a veil of air: 
The adverse powers, around Apollo laid, 
Crown the fair hills that silver Simois shade. 
In circle close each heavenly party sat, 
Intent to form the future scheme of fate; 
But mix not yet in fight, though Jove on high 
Gives the loud signal, and the heavens reply. 
Meanwhile the rushing armies hide the ground; 
The trampled centre yields a hollow sound: 
Steeds cased in mail, and chiefs in armour bright, 
The gleaming champaign glows with brazen light. 
Amid both hosts (a dreadful space) appear, 
There great Achilles; bold A_neas, here. 
[pg 365] 
With towering strides Aeneas first advanced; 
The nodding plumage on his helmet danced: 
Spread oa__er his breast the fencing shield he bore, 
And, so he moved, his javelin flamed before. 
Not so Pelides; furious to engage, 
He rusha__d impetuous. Such the liona__s rage, 
Who viewing first his foes with scornful eyes, 
Though all in arms the peopled city rise, 
Stalks careless on, with unregarding pride; 
Till at the length, by some brave youth defied, 
To his bold spear the savage turns alone, 
He murmurs fury with a hollow groan; 
He grins, he foams, he rolls his eyes around 
Lasha__d by his tail his heaving sides resound; 
He calls up all his rage; he grinds his teeth, 
Resolved on vengeance, or resolved on death. 
So fierce Achilles on A_neas flies; 
So stands A_neas, and his force defies. 
Ere yet the stern encounter joina__d, begun 
The seed of Thetis thus to Venusa__ son: 
a_oeWhy comes A_neas through the ranks so far? 
Seeks he to meet Achillesa__ arm in war, 
In hope the realms of Priam to enjoy, 
And prove his merits to the throne of Troy? 
Grant that beneath thy lance Achilles dies, 
The partial monarch may refuse the prize; 
Sons he has many; those thy pride may quell: 
And a__tis his fault to love those sons too well, 
Or, in reward of thy victorious hand, 
Has Troy proposed some spacious tract of land 
An ample forest, or a fair domain, 
Of hills for vines, and arable for grain? 
Even this, perhaps, will hardly prove thy lot. 
But can Achilles be so soon forgot? 
Once (as I think) you saw this brandisha__d spear 
And then the great A_neas seema__d to fear: 
With hearty haste from Idaa__s mount he fled, 
Nor, till he reacha__d Lyrnessus, turna__d his head. 
Her lofty walls not long our progress staya__d; 
Those, Pallas, Jove, and we, in ruins laid: 
In Grecian chains her captive race were cast; 
a__Tis true, the great Aeneas fled too fast. 
Defrauded of my conquest once before, 
What then I lost, the gods this day restore. 
Go; while thou maya__st, avoid the threatena__d fate; 
Fools stay to feel it, and are wise too late.a__ 
To this Anchisesa__ son: a_oeSuch words employ 
To one that fears thee, some unwarlike boy; 
Such we disdain; the best may be defied 
With mean reproaches, and unmanly pride; 
[pg 366] 
Unworthy the high race from which we came 
Proclaima__d so loudly by the voice of fame: 
Each from illustrious fathers draws his line; 
Each goddess-born; half human, half divine. 
Thetisa__ this day, or Venusa__ offspring dies, 
And tears shall trickle from celestial eyes: 
For when two heroes, thus derived, contend, 
a__Tis not in words the glorious strife can end. 
If yet thou further seek to learn my birth 
(A tale resounded through the spacious earth) 
Hear how the glorious origin we prove 
From ancient Dardanus, the first from Jove: 
Dardaniaa__s walls he raised; for Ilion, then, 
(The city since of many-languaged men,) 
Was not. The natives were content to till 
The shady foot of Idaa__s fountful hill.264 
From Dardanus great Erichthonius springs, 
The richest, once, of Asiaa__s wealthy kings; 
Three thousand mares his spacious pastures bred, 
Three thousand foals beside their mothers fed. 
Boreas, enamoura__d of the sprightly train, 
Conceala__d his godhead in a flowing mane, 
With voice dissembled to his loves he neigha__d, 
And coursed the dappled beauties oa__er the mead: 
Hence sprung twelve others of unrivalla__d kind, 
Swift as their mother mares, and father wind. 
These lightly skimming, when they swept the plain, 
Nor plied the grass, nor bent the tender grain; 
And when along the level seas they flew,265 
Scarce on the surface curla__d the briny dew. 
Such Erichthonius was: from him there came 
The sacred Tros, of whom the Trojan name. 
Three sons renowna__d adorna__d his nuptial bed, 
Ilus, Assaracus, and Ganymed: 
The matchless Ganymed, divinely fair, 
Whom heaven, enamoura__d, snatcha__d to upper air, 
To bear the cup of Jove (ethereal guest, 
The grace and glory of the ambrosial feast). 
The two remaining sons the line divide: 
First rose Laomedon from Ilusa__ side; 
From him Tithonus, now in cares grown old, 
And Priam, blessa__d with Hector, brave and bold; 
Clytius and Lampus, ever-honoura__d pair; 
[pg 367] 
And Hicetaon, thunderbolt of war. 
From great Assaracus sprang Capys, he 
Begat Anchises, and Anchises me. 
Such is our race: a__tis fortune gives us birth, 
But Jove alone endues the soul with worth: 
He, source of power and might! with boundless sway, 
All human courage gives, or takes away. 
Long in the field of words we may contend, 
Reproach is infinite, and knows no end, 
Arma__d or with truth or falsehood, right or wrong; 
So voluble a weapon is the tongue; 
Wounded, we wound; and neither side can fail, 
For every man has equal strength to rail: 
Women alone, when in the streets they jar, 
Perhaps excel us in this wordy war; 
Like us they stand, encompassa__d with the crowd, 
And vent their anger impotent and loud. 
Cease thena_"Our business in the field of fight 
Is not to question, but to prove our might. 
To all those insults thou hast offera__d here, 
Receive this answer: a__tis my flying spear.a__ 
He spoke. With all his force the javelin flung, 
Fixa__d deep, and loudly in the buckler rung. 
Far on his outstretcha__d arm, Pelides held 
(To meet the thundering lance) his dreadful shield, 
That trembled as it stuck; nor void of fear 
Saw, ere it fell, the immeasurable spear. 
His fears were vain; impenetrable charms 
Secured the temper of the ethereal arms. 
Through two strong plates the point its passage held, 
But stoppa__d, and rested, by the third repella__d. 
Five plates of various metal, various mould, 
Composed the shield; of brass each outward fold, 
Of tin each inward, and the middle gold: 
There stuck the lance. Then rising ere he threw, 
The forceful spear of great Achilles flew, 
And pierced the Dardan shielda__s extremest bound, 
Where the shrill brass returna__d a sharper sound: 
Through the thin verge the Pelean weapon glides, 
And the slight covering of expanded hides. 
A_neas his contracted body bends, 
And oa__er him high the riven targe extends, 
Sees, through its parting plates, the upper air, 
And at his back perceives the quivering spear: 
A fate so near him, chills his soul with fright; 
And swims before his eyes the many-coloura__d light. 
Achilles, rushing in with dreadful cries, 
Draws his broad blade, and at A_neas flies: 
A_neas rousing as the foe came on, 
With force collected, heaves a mighty stone: 
[pg 368] 
A mass enormous! which in modern days 
No two of eartha__s degenerate sons could raise. 
But oceana__s god, whose earthquakes rock the ground. 
Saw the distress, and moved the powers around: 
a_oeLo! on the brink of fate A_neas stands, 
An instant victim to Achillesa__ hands; 
By Phoebus urged; but Phoebus has bestowa__d 
His aid in vain: the man oa__erpowers the god. 
And can ye see this righteous chief atone 
With guiltless blood for vices not his own? 
To all the gods his constant vows were paid; 
Sure, though he wars for Troy, he claims our aid. 
Fate wills not this; nor thus can Jove resign 
The future father of the Dardan line:266 
The first great ancestor obtaina__d his grace, 
And still his love descends on all the race: 
For Priam now, and Priama__s faithless kind, 
At length are odious to the all-seeing mind; 
On great A_neas shall devolve the reign, 
And sons succeeding sons the lasting line sustain.a__ 
The great earth-shaker thus: to whom replies 
The imperial goddess with the radiant eyes: 
a_oeGood as he is, to immolate or spare 
The Dardan prince, O Neptune! be thy care; 
Pallas and I, by all that gods can bind, 
Have sworn destruction to the Trojan kind; 
Not even an instant to protract their fate, 
Or save one member of the sinking state; 
Till her last flame be quencha__d with her last gore, 
And even her crumbling ruins are no more.a__ 
The king of ocean to the fight descends, 
Through all the whistling darts his course he bends, 
Swift interposed between the warrior flies, 
And casts thick darkness oa__er Achillesa__ eyes.267 
From great A_neasa__ shield the spear he drew, 
And at his mastera__s feet the weapon threw. 
That done, with force divine he snatcha__d on high 
The Dardan prince, and bore him through the sky, 
Smooth-gliding without step, above the heads 
Of warring heroes, and of bounding steeds: 
[pg 369] 
Till at the battlea__s utmost verge they light, 
Where the slow Caucans close the rear of fight. 
The godhead there (his heavenly form confessa__d) 
With words like these the panting chief addressa__d: 
a_oeWhat power, O prince! with force inferior far, 
Urged thee to meet Achillesa__ arm in war? 
Henceforth beware, nor antedate thy doom, 
Defrauding fate of all thy fame to come. 
But when the day decreed (for come it must) 
Shall lay this dreadful hero in the dust, 
Let then the furies of that arm be known, 
Secure no Grecian force transcends thy own.a__ 
With that, he left him wondering as he lay, 
Then from Achilles chased the mist away: 
Sudden, returning with a stream of light, 
The scene of war came rushing on his sight. 
Then thus, amazed; a_oeWhat wonders strike my mind! 
My spear, that parted on the wings of wind, 
Laid here before me! and the Dardan lord, 
That fell this instant, vanisha__d from my sword! 
I thought alone with mortals to contend, 
But powers celestial sure this foe defend. 
Great as he is, our arms he scarce will try, 
Content for once, with all his gods, to fly. 
Now then let others bleed.a__ This said, aloud 
He vents his fury and inflames the crowd: 
a_oeO Greeks! (he cries, and every rank alarms) 
Join battle, man to man, and arms to arms! 
a__Tis not in me, though favoura__d by the sky, 
To mow whole troops, and make whole armies fly: 
No god can singly such a host engage, 
Not Mars himself, nor great Minervaa__s rage. 
But whatsoea__er Achilles can inspire, 
Whatea__er of active force, or acting fire; 
Whatea__er this heart can prompt, or hand obey; 
All, all Achilles, Greeks! is yours to-day. 
Through yon wide host this arm shall scatter fear, 
And thin the squadrons with my single spear.a__ 
He said: nor less elate with martial joy, 
The godlike Hector warma__d the troops of Troy: 
a_oeTrojans, to war! Think, Hector leads you on; 
Nor dread the vaunts of Peleusa__ haughty son. 
Deeds must decide our fate. Ea__en these with words 
Insult the brave, who tremble at their swords: 
The weakest atheist-wretch all heaven defies, 
But shrinks and shudders when the thunder flies. 
Nor from yon boaster shall your chief retire, 
Not though his heart were steel, his hands were fire; 
That fire, that steel, your Hector should withstand, 
And brave that vengeful heart, that dreadful hand.a__ 
[pg 370] 
Thus (breathing rage through all) the hero said; 
A wood of lances rises round his head, 
Clamours on clamours tempest all the air, 
They join, they throng, they thicken to the war. 
But Phoebus warns him from high heaven to shun 
The single fight with Thetisa__ godlike son; 
More safe to combat in the mingled band, 
Nor tempt too near the terrors of his hand. 
He hears, obedient to the god of light, 
And, plunged within the ranks, awaits the fight. 
Then fierce Achilles, shouting to the skies, 
On Troya__s whole force with boundless fury flies. 
First falls Iphytion, at his armya__s head; 
Brave was the chief, and brave the host he led; 
From great Otrynteus he derived his blood, 
His mother was a Nais, of the flood; 
Beneath the shades of Tmolus, crowna__d with snow, 
From Hydea__s walls he ruled the lands below. 
Fierce as he springs, the sword his head divides: 
The parted visage falls on equal sides: 
With loud-resounding arms he strikes the plain; 
While thus Achilles glories oa__er the slain: 
a_oeLie there, Otryntides! the Trojan earth 
Receives thee dead, though Gygae boast thy birth; 
Those beauteous fields where Hyllusa__ waves are rolla__d, 
And plenteous Hermus swells with tides of gold, 
Are thine no more.a__a_"The insulting hero said, 
And left him sleeping in eternal shade. 
The rolling wheels of Greece the body tore, 
And dasha__d their axles with no vulgar gore. 
Demoleon next, Antenora__s offspring, laid 
Breathless in dust, the price of rashness paid. 
The impatient steel with full-descending sway 
Forced through his brazen helm its furious way, 
Resistless drove the battera__d skull before, 
And dasha__d and mingled all the brains with gore. 
This sees Hippodamas, and seized with fright, 
Deserts his chariot for a swifter flight: 
The lance arrests him: an ignoble wound 
The panting Trojan rivets to the ground. 
He groans away his soul: not louder roars, 
At Neptunea__s shrine on Helicea__s high shores, 
The victim bull; the rocks re-bellow round, 
And ocean listens to the grateful sound. 
Then fell on Polydore his vengeful rage,268 
The youngest hope of Priama__s stooping age: 
(Whose feet for swiftness in the race surpassa__d:) 
[pg 371] 
Of all his sons, the dearest, and the last. 
To the forbidden field he takes his flight, 
In the first folly of a youthful knight, 
To vaunt his swiftness wheels around the plain, 
But vaunts not long, with all his swiftness slain: 
Struck where the crossing belts unite behind, 
And golden rings the double back-plate joina__d 
Forth through the navel burst the thrilling steel; 
And on his knees with piercing shrieks he fell; 
The rushing entrails poura__d upon the ground 
His hands collect; and darkness wraps him round. 
When Hector viewa__d, all ghastly in his gore, 
Thus sadly slain the unhappy Polydore, 
A cloud of sorrow overcast his sight, 
His soul no longer brooka__d the distant fight: 
Full in Achillesa__ dreadful front he came, 
And shook his javelin like a waving flame. 
The son of Peleus sees, with joy possessa__d, 
His heart high-bounding in his rising breast. 
a_oeAnd, lo! the man on whom black fates attend; 
The man, that slew Achilles, is his friend! 
No more shall Hectora__s and Pelidesa__ spear 
Turn from each other in the walks of war.a__a_" 
Then with revengeful eyes he scanna__d him oa__er: 
a_oeCome, and receive thy fate!a__ He spake no more. 
Hector, undaunted, thus: a_oeSuch words employ 
To one that dreads thee, some unwarlike boy: 
Such we could give, defying and defied, 
Mean intercourse of obloquy and pride! 
I know thy force to mine superior far; 
But heaven alone confers success in war: 
Mean as I am, the gods may guide my dart, 
And give it entrance in a braver heart.a__ 
Then parts the lance: but Pallasa__ heavenly breath 
Far from Achilles wafts the winged death: 
The bidden dart again to Hector flies, 
And at the feet of its great master lies. 
Achilles closes with his hated foe, 
His heart and eyes with flaming fury glow: 
But present to his aid, Apollo shrouds 
The favoura__d hero in a veil of clouds. 
Thrice struck Pelides with indignant heart, 
Thrice in impassive air he plunged the dart; 
The spear a fourth time buried in the cloud. 
He foams with fury, and exclaims aloud: 
a_oeWretch! thou hast a__scaped again; once more thy flight 
Has saved thee, and the partial god of light. 
But long thou shalt not thy just fate withstand, 
If any power assist Achillesa__ hand. 
Fly then inglorious! but thy flight this day 
[pg 372] 
Whole hecatombs of Trojan ghosts shall pay.a__ 
With that, he gluts his rage on numbers slain: 
Then Dryops tumbled to the ensanguined plain, 
Pierced through the neck: he left him panting there, 
And stoppa__d Demuchus, great Philetora__s heir. 
Gigantic chief! deep gasha__d the enormous blade, 
And for the soul an ample passage made. 
Laoganus and Dardanus expire, 
The valiant sons of an unhappy sire; 
Both in one instant from the chariot hurla__d, 
Sunk in one instant to the nether world: 
This difference only their sad fates afford 
That one the spear destroya__d, and one the sword. 
Nor less unpitied, young Alastor bleeds; 
In vain his youth, in vain his beauty pleads; 
In vain he begs thee, with a supplianta__s moan, 
To spare a form, an age so like thy own! 
Unhappy boy! no prayer, no moving art, 
Ea__er bent that fierce, inexorable heart! 
While yet he trembled at his knees, and cried, 
The ruthless falchion oped his tender side; 
The panting liver pours a flood of gore 
That drowns his bosom till he pants no more. 
Through Muliusa__ head then drove the impetuous spear: 
The warrior falls, transfixa__d from ear to ear. 
Thy life, Echeclus! next the sword bereaves, 
Deep though the front the ponderous falchion cleaves; 
Warma__d in the brain the smoking weapon lies, 
The purple death comes floating oa__er his eyes. 
Then brave Deucalion died: the dart was flung 
Where the knit nerves the pliant elbow strung; 
He droppa__d his arm, an unassisting weight, 
And stood all impotent, expecting fate: 
Full on his neck the falling falchion sped, 
From his broad shoulders hewa__d his crested head: 
Forth from the bone the spinal marrow flies, 
And, sunk in dust, the corpse extended lies. 
Rhigmas, whose race from fruitful Thracia came, 
(The son of Pierus, an illustrious name,) 
Succeeds to fate: the spear his belly rends; 
Prone from his car the thundering chief descends. 
The squire, who saw expiring on the ground 
His prostrate master, reina__d the steeds around; 
His back, scarce turna__d, the Pelian javelin gored, 
And stretcha__d the servant oa__er his dying lord. 
As when a flame the winding valley fills, 
And runs on crackling shrubs between the hills; 
Then oa__er the stubble up the mountain flies, 
Fires the high woods, and blazes to the skies, 
This way and that, the spreading torrent roars: 
[pg 373] 
So sweeps the hero through the wasted shores; 
Around him wide, immense destruction pours 
And earth is deluged with the sanguine showers 
As with autumnal harvests covera__d oa__er, 
And thick bestrewn, lies Ceresa__ sacred floor; 
When round and round, with never-wearied pain, 
The trampling steers beat out the unnumbera__d grain: 
So the fierce coursers, as the chariot rolls, 
Tread down whole ranks, and crush out heroesa__ souls, 
Dasha__d from their hoofs while oa__er the dead they fly, 
Black, bloody drops the smoking chariot dye: 
The spiky wheels through heaps of carnage tore; 
And thick the groaning axles droppa__d with gore. 
High oa__er the scene of death Achilles stood, 
All grim with dust, all horrible in blood: 
Yet still insatiate, still with rage on flame; 
Such is the lust of never-dying fame! 
Illustration: CENTAUR. 
CENTAUR. 
[pg 374] 
BOOK XXI. 
ARGUMENT. 
THE BATTLE IN THE RIVER SCAMANDER.269 
The Trojans fly before Achilles, some towards the town, others to the 
river Scamander: he falls upon the latter with great slaughter: takes 
twelve captives alive, to sacrifice to the shade of Patroclus; and 
kills Lycaon and Asteropeus. Scamander attacks him with all his waves: 
Neptune and Pallas assist the hero: Simois joins Scamander: at length 
Vulcan, by the instigation of Juno, almost dries up the river. This 
Combat ended, the other gods engage each other. Meanwhile Achilles 
continues the slaughter, drives the rest into Troy: Agenor only makes a 
stand, and is conveyed away in a cloud by Apollo; who (to delude 
Achilles) takes upon him Agenora__s shape, and while he pursues him in 
that disguise, gives the Trojans an opportunity of retiring into their 
city. 
The same day continues. The scene is on the banks and in the stream of 
Scamander. 
And now to Xanthusa__ gliding stream they drove, 
Xanthus, immortal progeny of Jove. 
The river here divides the flying train, 
Part to the town fly diverse oa__er the plain, 
Where late their troops triumphant bore the fight, 
Now chased, and trembling in ignoble flight: 
(These with a gathered mist Saturnia shrouds, 
And rolls behind the rout a heap of clouds:) 
Part plunge into the stream: old Xanthus roars, 
The flashing billows beat the whitena__d shores: 
With cries promiscuous all the banks resound, 
And here, and there, in eddies whirling round, 
[pg 375] 
The flouncing steeds and shrieking warriors drowna__d. 
As the scorcha__d locusts from their fields retire, 
While fast behind them runs the blaze of fire; 
Driven from the land before the smoky cloud, 
The clustering legions rush into the flood: 
So, plunged in Xanthus by Achillesa__ force, 
Roars the resounding surge with men and horse. 
His bloody lance the hero casts aside, 
(Which spreading tamarisks on the margin hide,) 
Then, like a god, the rapid billows braves, 
Arma__d with his sword, high brandisha__d oa__er the waves: 
Now down he plunges, now he whirls it round, 
Deep groana__d the waters with the dying sound; 
Repeated wounds the reddening river dyed, 
And the warm purple circled on the tide. 
Swift through the foamy flood the Trojans fly, 
And close in rocks or winding caverns lie: 
So the huge dolphin tempesting the main, 
In shoals before him fly the scaly train, 
Confusedly heapa__d they seek their inmost caves, 
Or pant and heave beneath the floating waves. 
Now, tired with slaughter, from the Trojan band 
Twelve chosen youths he drags alive to land; 
With their rich belts their captive arms restrains 
(Late their proud ornaments, but now their chains). 
These his attendants to the ships conveya__d, 
Sad victims destined to Patroclusa__ shade; 
Then, as once more he plunged amid the flood, 
The young Lycaon in his passage stood; 
The son of Priam; whom the heroa__s hand 
But late made captive in his fathera__s land 
(As from a sycamore, his sounding steel 
Loppa__d the green arms to spoke a chariot wheel) 
To Lemnosa__ isle he sold the royal slave, 
Where Jasona__s son the price demanded gave; 
But kind Eetion, touching on the shore, 
The ransoma__d prince to fair Arisbe bore. 
Ten days were past, since in his fathera__s reign 
He felt the sweets of liberty again; 
The next, that god whom men in vain withstand 
Gives the same youth to the same conquering hand 
Now never to return! and dooma__d to go 
A sadder journey to the shades below. 
His well-known face when great Achilles eyed, 
(The helm and visor he had cast aside 
With wild affright, and droppa__d upon the field 
His useless lance and unavailing shield,) 
As trembling, panting, from the stream he fled, 
And knocka__d his faltering knees, the hero said. 
a_oeYe mighty gods! what wonders strike my view! 
[pg 376] 
Is it in vain our conquering arms subdue? 
Sure I shall see yon heaps of Trojans killa__d 
Rise from the shades, and brave me on the field; 
As now the captive, whom so late I bound 
And sold to Lemnos, stalks on Trojan ground! 
Not him the seaa__s unmeasured deeps detain, 
That bar such numbers from their native plain; 
Lo! he returns. Try, then, my flying spear! 
Try, if the grave can hold the wanderer; 
If earth, at length this active prince can seize, 
Earth, whose strong grasp has held down Hercules.a__ 
Thus while he spoke, the Trojan pale with fears 
Approacha__d, and sought his knees with suppliant tears 
Loth as he was to yield his youthful breath, 
And his soul shivering at the approach of death. 
Achilles raised the spear, prepared to wound; 
He kissa__d his feet, extended on the ground: 
And while, above, the spear suspended stood, 
Longing to dip its thirsty point in blood, 
One hand embraced them close, one stoppa__d the dart, 
While thus these melting words attempt his heart: 
a_oeThy well-known captive, great Achilles! see, 
Once more Lycaon trembles at thy knee. 
Some pity to a supplianta__s name afford, 
Who shared the gifts of Ceres at thy board; 
Whom late thy conquering arm to Lemnos bore, 
Far from his father, friends, and native shore; 
A hundred oxen were his price that day, 
Now sums immense thy mercy shall repay. 
Scarce respited from woes I yet appear, 
And scarce twelve morning suns have seen me here; 
Lo! Jove again submits me to thy hands, 
Again, her victim cruel Fate demands! 
I sprang from Priam, and Laothoe fair, 
(Old Altesa__ daughter, and Lelegiaa__s heir; 
Who held in Pedasus his famed abode, 
And ruled the fields where silver Satnio flowa__d,) 
Two sons (alas! unhappy sons) she bore; 
For ah! one spear shall drink each brothera__s gore, 
And I succeed to slaughtera__d Polydore. 
How from that arm of terror shall I fly? 
Some demon urges! a__tis my doom to die! 
If ever yet soft pity toucha__d thy mind, 
Ah! think not me too much of Hectora__s kind! 
Not the same mother gave thy suppliant breath, 
With his, who wrought thy loved Patroclusa__ death.a__ 
These words, attended with a shower of tears, 
The youth addressa__d to unrelenting ears: 
a_oeTalk not of life, or ransom (he replies): 
Patroclus dead, whoever meets me, dies: 
[pg 377] 
In vain a single Trojan sues for grace; 
But least, the sons of Priama__s hateful race. 
Die then, my friend! what boots it to deplore? 
The great, the good Patroclus is no more! 
He, far thy better, was foredooma__d to die, 
And thou, dost thou bewail mortality? 
Seest thou not me, whom naturea__s gifts adorn, 
Sprung from a hero, from a goddess born? 
The day shall come (which nothing can avert) 
When by the spear, the arrow, or the dart, 
By night, or day, by force, or by design, 
Impending death and certain fate are mine! 
Die then,a__a_"He said; and as the word he spoke, 
The fainting stripling sank before the stroke: 
His hand forgot its grasp, and left the spear, 
While all his trembling frame confessa__d his fear: 
Sudden, Achilles his broad sword displaya__d, 
And buried in his neck the reeking blade. 
Prone fell the youth; and panting on the land, 
The gushing purple dyed the thirsty sand. 
The victor to the stream the carcase gave, 
And thus insults him, floating on the wave: 
a_oeLie there, Lycaon! let the fish surround 
Thy bloated corpse, and suck thy gory wound: 
There no sad mother shall thy funerals weep, 
But swift Scamander roll thee to the deep, 
Whose every wave some watery monster brings, 
To feast unpunisha__d on the fat of kings. 
So perish Troy, and all the Trojan line! 
Such ruin theirs, and such compassion mine. 
What boots ye now Scamandera__s worshippa__d stream, 
His earthly honours, and immortal name? 
In vain your immolated bulls are slain, 
Your living coursers glut his gulfs in vain! 
Thus he rewards you, with this bitter fate; 
Thus, till the Grecian vengeance is complete: 
Thus is atoned Patroclusa__ honoura__d shade, 
And the short absence of Achilles paid.a__ 
These boastful words provoked the raging god; 
With fury swells the violated flood. 
What means divine may yet the power employ 
To check Achilles, and to rescue Troy? 
Meanwhile the hero springs in arms, to dare 
The great Asteropeus to mortal war; 
The son of Pelagon, whose lofty line 
Flows from the source of Axius, stream divine! 
(Fair Peribaeaa__s love the god had crowna__d, 
With all his refluent waters circled round:) 
On him Achilles rusha__d; he fearless stood, 
And shook two spears, advancing from the flood; 
[pg 378] 
The flood impella__d him, on Pelidesa__ head 
To avenge his waters choked with heaps of dead. 
Near as they drew, Achilles thus began: 
a_oeWhat art thou, boldest of the race of man? 
Who, or from whence? Unhappy is the sire 
Whose son encounters our resistless ire.a__ 
a_oeO son of Peleus! what avails to trace 
(Replied the warrior) our illustrious race? 
From rich Paeoniaa__s valleys I command, 
Arma__d with protended spears, my native band; 
Now shines the tenth bright morning since I came 
In aid of Ilion to the fields of fame: 
Axius, who swells with all the neighbouring rills, 
And wide around the floated region fills, 
Begot my sire, whose spear much glory won: 
Now lift thy arm, and try that heroa__s son!a__ 
Threatening he said: the hostile chiefs advance; 
At once Asteropeus discharged each lance, 
(For both his dexterous hands the lance could wield,) 
One struck, but pierced not, the Vulcanian shield; 
One razed Achillesa__ hand; the spouting blood 
Spun forth; in earth the fastena__d weapon stood. 
Like lightning next the Pelean javelin flies: 
Its erring fury hissa__d along the skies; 
Deep in the swelling bank was driven the spear, 
Even to the middle earth; and quivera__d there. 
Then from his side the sword Pelides drew, 
And on his foe with double fury flew. 
The foe thrice tugga__d, and shook the rooted wood; 
Repulsive of his might the weapon stood: 
The fourth, he tries to break the spear in vain; 
Bent as he stands, he tumbles to the plain; 
His belly opena__d with a ghastly wound, 
The reeking entrails pour upon the ground. 
Beneath the heroa__s feet he panting lies, 
And his eye darkens, and his spirit flies; 
While the proud victor thus triumphing said, 
His radiant armour tearing from the dead: 
a_oeSo ends thy glory! Such the fate they prove, 
Who strive presumptuous with the sons of Jove! 
Sprung from a river, didst thou boast thy line? 
But great Saturnius is the source of mine. 
How durst thou vaunt thy watery progeny? 
Of Peleus, A_acus, and Jove, am I. 
The race of these superior far to those, 
As he that thunders to the stream that flows. 
What rivers can, Scamander might have shown; 
But Jove he dreads, nor wars against his son. 
Even Achelous might contend in vain, 
And all the roaring billows of the main. 
[pg 379] 
The eternal ocean, from whose fountains flow 
The seas, the rivers, and the springs below, 
The thundering voice of Jove abhors to hear, 
And in his deep abysses shakes with fear.a__ 
He said: then from the bank his javelin tore, 
And left the breathless warrior in his gore. 
The floating tides the bloody carcase lave, 
And beat against it, wave succeeding wave; 
Till, rolla__d between the banks, it lies the food 
Of curling eels, and fishes of the flood. 
All scattera__d round the stream (their mightiest slain) 
The amazed Paeonians scour along the plain; 
He vents his fury on the flying crew, 
Thrasius, Astyplus, and Mnesus slew; 
Mydon, Thersilochus, with A_nius, fell; 
And numbers more his lance had plunged to hell, 
But from the bottom of his gulfs profound 
Scamander spoke; the shores returna__d the sound. 
a_oeO first of mortals! (for the gods are thine) 
In valour matchless, and in force divine! 
If Jove have given thee every Trojan head, 
a__Tis not on me thy rage should heap the dead. 
See! my choked streams no more their course can keep, 
Nor roll their wonted tribute to the deep. 
Turn then, impetuous! from our injured flood; 
Content, thy slaughters could amaze a god.a__ 
In human form, confessa__d before his eyes, 
The river thus; and thus the chief replies: 
a_oeO sacred stream! thy word we shall obey; 
But not till Troy the destined vengeance pay, 
Not till within her towers the perjured train 
Shall pant, and tremble at our arms again; 
Not till proud Hector, guardian of her wall, 
Or stain this lance, or see Achilles fall.a__ 
He said; and drove with fury on the foe. 
Then to the godhead of the silver bow 
The yellow flood began: a_oeO son of Jove! 
Was not the mandate of the sire above 
Full and express, that Phoebus should employ 
His sacred arrows in defence of Troy, 
And make her conquer, till Hyperiona__s fall 
In awful darkness hide the face of all?a__ 
He spoke in vaina_"The chief without dismay 
Ploughs through the boiling surge his desperate way. 
Then rising in his rage above the shores, 
From all his deep the bellowing river roars, 
Huge heaps of slain disgorges on the coast, 
And round the banks the ghastly dead are tossa__d. 
While all before, the billows ranged on high, 
(A watery bulwark,) screen the bands who fly. 
Now bursting on his head with thundering sound, 
[pg 380] 
The falling deluge whelms the hero round: 
His loaded shield bends to the rushing tide; 
His feet, upborne, scarce the strong flood divide, 
Sliddering, and staggering. On the border stood 
A spreading elm, that overhung the flood; 
He seized a bending bough, his steps to stay; 
The plant uprooted to his weight gave way.270 
Heaving the bank, and undermining all; 
Loud flash the waters to the rushing fall 
Of the thick foliage. The large trunk displaya__d 
Bridged the rough flood across: the hero staya__d 
On this his weight, and raised upon his hand, 
Leapa__d from the channel, and regaina__d the land. 
Then blackena__d the wild waves: the murmur rose: 
The god pursues, a huger billow throws, 
And bursts the bank, ambitious to destroy 
The man whose fury is the fate of Troy. 
He like the warlike eagle speeds his pace 
(Swiftest and strongest of the aerial race); 
Far as a spear can fly, Achilles springs; 
At every bound his clanging armour rings: 
Now here, now there, he turns on every side, 
And winds his course before the following tide; 
The waves flow after, wheresoea__er he wheels, 
And gather fast, and murmur at his heels. 
So when a peasant to his garden brings 
Soft rills of water from the bubbling springs, 
And calls the floods from high, to bless his bowers, 
And feed with pregnant streams the plants and flowers: 
Soon as he clears whatea__er their passage staya__d, 
And marks the future current with his spade, 
Swift oa__er the rolling pebbles, down the hills, 
Louder and louder purl the falling rills; 
Before him scattering, they prevent his pains, 
And shine in mazy wanderings oa__er the plains. 
Still flies Achilles, but before his eyes 
Still swift Scamander rolls wherea__er he flies: 
Not all his speed escapes the rapid floods; 
The first of men, but not a match for gods. 
Oft as he turna__d the torrent to oppose, 
And bravely try if all the powers were foes; 
So oft the surge, in watery mountains spread, 
Beats on his back, or bursts upon his head. 
Yet dauntless still the adverse flood he braves, 
And still indignant bounds above the waves. 
Tired by the tides, his knees relax with toil; 
[pg 381] 
Washa__d from beneath him slides the slimy soil; 
When thus (his eyes on heavena__s expansion thrown) 
Forth bursts the hero with an angry groan: 
a_oeIs there no god Achilles to befriend, 
No power to avert his miserable end? 
Prevent, O Jove! this ignominious date,271 
And make my future life the sport of fate. 
Of all heavena__s oracles believed in vain, 
But most of Thetis must her son complain; 
By Phoebusa__ darts she prophesied my fall, 
In glorious arms before the Trojan wall. 
Oh! had I died in fields of battle warm, 
Stretcha__d like a hero, by a heroa__s arm! 
Might Hectora__s spear this dauntless bosom rend, 
And my swift soul oa__ertake my slaughtera__d friend. 
Ah no! Achilles meets a shameful fate, 
Oh how unworthy of the brave and great! 
Like some vile swain, whom on a rainy day, 
Crossing a ford, the torrent sweeps away, 
An unregarded carcase to the sea.a__ 
Neptune and Pallas haste to his relief, 
And thus in human form addressa__d the chief: 
The power of ocean first: a_oeForbear thy fear, 
O son of Peleus! Lo, thy gods appear! 
Behold! from Jove descending to thy aid, 
Propitious Neptune, and the blue-eyed maid. 
Stay, and the furious flood shall cease to rave 
a__Tis not thy fate to glut his angry wave. 
But thou, the counsel heaven suggests, attend! 
Nor breathe from combat, nor thy sword suspend, 
Till Troy receive her flying sons, till all 
Her routed squadrons pant behind their wall: 
Hector alone shall stand his fatal chance, 
And Hectora__s blood shall smoke upon thy lance. 
Thine is the glory dooma__d.a__ Thus spake the gods: 
Then swift ascended to the bright abodes. 
Stung with new ardour, thus by heaven impella__d, 
He springs impetuous, and invades the field: 
Oa__er all the expanded plain the waters spread; 
Heaved on the bounding billows danced the dead, 
Floating a__midst scattera__d arms; while casques of gold 
And turna__d-up bucklers glittera__d as they rolla__d. 
High oa__er the surging tide, by leaps and bounds, 
He wades, and mounts; the parted wave resounds. 
Not a whole river stops the heroa__s course, 
While Pallas fills him with immortal force. 
With equal rage, indignant Xanthus roars, 
And lifts his billows, and oa__erwhelms his shores. 
[pg 382] 
Then thus to Simois! a_oeHaste, my brother flood; 
And check this mortal that controls a god; 
Our bravest heroes else shall quit the fight, 
And Ilion tumble from her towery height. 
Call then thy subject streams, and bid them roar, 
From all thy fountains swell thy watery store, 
With broken rocks, and with a load of dead, 
Charge the black surge, and pour it on his head. 
Mark how resistless through the floods he goes, 
And boldly bids the warring gods be foes! 
But nor that force, nor form divine to sight, 
Shall aught avail him, if our rage unite: 
Whelma__d under our dark gulfs those arms shall lie, 
That blaze so dreadful in each Trojan eye; 
And deep beneath a sandy mountain hurla__d, 
Immersed remain this terror of the world. 
Such ponderous ruin shall confound the place, 
No Greeks shall ea__er his perisha__d relics grace, 
No hand his bones shall gather, or inhume; 
These his cold rites, and this his watery tomb.a__ 
Illustration: ACHILLES CONTENDING WITH THE RIVERS. 
ACHILLES CONTENDING WITH THE RIVERS. 
He said; and on the chief descends amain, 
Increased with gore, and swelling with the slain. 
Then, murmuring from his beds, he boils, he raves, 
And a foam whitens on the purple waves: 
At every step, before Achilles stood 
The crimson surge, and deluged him with blood. 
Fear toucha__d the queen of heaven: she saw dismaya__d, 
She calla__d aloud, and summona__d Vulcana__s aid. 
[pg 383] 
a_oeRise to the war! the insulting flood requires 
Thy wasteful arm! assemble all thy fires! 
While to their aid, by our command enjoina__d, 
Rush the swift eastern and the western wind: 
These from old ocean at my word shall blow, 
Pour the red torrent on the watery foe, 
Corses and arms to one bright ruin turn, 
And hissing rivers to their bottoms burn. 
Go, mighty in thy rage! display thy power, 
Drink the whole flood, the crackling trees devour. 
Scorch all the banks! and (till our voice reclaim) 
Exert the unwearied furies of the flame!a__ 
The power ignipotent her word obeys: 
Wide oa__er the plain he pours the boundless blaze; 
At once consumes the dead, and dries the soil 
And the shrunk waters in their channel boil. 
As when autumnal Boreas sweeps the sky, 
And instant blows the watera__d gardens dry: 
So looka__d the field, so whitena__d was the ground, 
While Vulcan breathed the fiery blast around. 
Swift on the sedgy reeds the ruin preys; 
Along the margin winds the running blaze: 
The trees in flaming rows to ashes turn, 
The flowering lotos and the tamarisk burn, 
Broad elm, and cypress rising in a spire; 
The watery willows hiss before the fire. 
Now glow the waves, the fishes pant for breath, 
The eels lie twisting in the pangs of death: 
Now flounce aloft, now dive the scaly fry, 
Or, gasping, turn their bellies to the sky. 
At length the river reara__d his languid head, 
And thus, short-panting, to the god he said: 
a_oeOh Vulcan! oh! what power resists thy might? 
I faint, I sink, unequal to the fighta_" 
I yielda_"Let Ilion fall; if fate decreea_" 
Aha_"bend no more thy fiery arms on me!a__ 
He ceased; wide conflagration blazing round; 
The bubbling waters yield a hissing sound. 
As when the flames beneath a cauldron rise,272 
To melt the fat of some rich sacrifice, 
Amid the fierce embrace of circling fires 
The waters foam, the heavy smoke aspires: 
So boils the imprisona__d flood, forbid to flow, 
And choked with vapours feels his bottom glow. 
To Juno then, imperial queen of air, 
[pg 384] 
The burning river sends his earnest prayer: 
a_oeAh why, Saturnia; must thy son engage 
Me, only me, with all his wasteful rage? 
On other gods his dreadful arm employ, 
For mightier gods assert the cause of Troy. 
Submissive I desist, if thou command; 
But ah! withdraw this all-destroying hand. 
Hear then my solemn oath, to yield to fate 
Unaided Ilion, and her destined state, 
Till Greece shall gird her with destructive flame, 
And in one ruin sink the Trojan name.a__ 
His warm entreaty toucha__d Saturniaa__s ear: 
She bade the ignipotent his rage forbear, 
Recall the flame, nor in a mortal cause 
Infest a god: the obedient flame withdraws: 
Again the branching streams begin to spread, 
And soft remurmur in their wonted bed. 
While these by Junoa__s will the strife resign, 
The warring gods in fierce contention join: 
Rekindling rage each heavenly breast alarms: 
With horrid clangour shock the ethereal arms: 
Heaven in loud thunder bids the trumpet sound; 
And wide beneath them groans the rending ground. 
Jove, as his sport, the dreadful scene descries, 
And views contending gods with careless eyes. 
The power of battles lifts his brazen spear, 
And first assaults the radiant queen of war: 
a_oeWhat moved thy madness, thus to disunite 
Ethereal minds, and mix all heaven in fight? 
What wonder this, when in thy frantic mood 
Thou drovest a mortal to insult a god? 
Thy impious hand Tydidesa__ javelin bore, 
And madly bathed it in celestial gore.a__ 
He spoke, and smote the long-resounding shield, 
Which bears Jovea__s thunder on its dreadful field: 
The adamantine aegis of her sire, 
That turns the glancing bolt and forked fire. 
Then heaved the goddess in her mighty hand 
A stone, the limit of the neighbouring land, 
There fixa__d from eldest times; black, craggy, vast; 
This at the heavenly homicide she cast. 
Thundering he falls, a mass of monstrous size: 
And seven broad acres covers as he lies. 
The stunning stroke his stubborn nerves unbound: 
Loud oa__er the fields his ringing arms resound: 
The scornful dame her conquest views with smiles, 
And, glorying, thus the prostrate god reviles: 
a_oeHast thou not yet, insatiate fury! known 
How far Minervaa__s force transcends thy own? 
Juno, whom thou rebellious darest withstand, 
[pg 385] 
Corrects thy folly thus by Pallasa__ hand; 
Thus meets thy broken faith with just disgrace, 
And partial aid to Troya__s perfidious race.a__ 
The goddess spoke, and turna__d her eyes away, 
That, beaming round, diffused celestial day. 
Jovea__s Cyprian daughter, stooping on the land, 
Lent to the wounded god her tender hand: 
Slowly he rises, scarcely breathes with pain, 
And, proppa__d on her fair arm, forsakes the plain. 
This the bright empress of the heavens surveya__d, 
And, scoffing, thus to wara__s victorious maid: 
a_oeLo! what an aid on Marsa__s side is seen! 
The smilesa__ and lovesa__ unconquerable queen! 
Mark with what insolence, in open view, 
She moves: let Pallas, if she dares, pursue.a__ 
Minerva smiling heard, the pair oa__ertook, 
And slightly on her breast the wanton strook: 
She, unresisting, fell (her spirits fled); 
On earth together lay the lovers spread. 
a_oeAnd like these heroes be the fate of all 
(Minerva cries) who guard the Trojan wall! 
To Grecian gods such let the Phrygian be, 
So dread, so fierce, as Venus is to me; 
Then from the lowest stone shall Troy be moved.a__ 
Thus she, and Juno with a smile approved. 
Meantime, to mix in more than mortal fight, 
The god of ocean dares the god of light. 
a_oeWhat sloth has seized us, when the fields around 
Ring with conflicting powers, and heaven returns the sound: 
Shall, ignominious, we with shame retire, 
No deed performa__d, to our Olympian sire? 
Come, prove thy arm! for first the war to wage, 
Suits not my greatness, or superior age: 
Rash as thou art to prop the Trojan throne, 
(Forgetful of my wrongs, and of thy own,) 
And guard the race of proud Laomedon! 
Hast thou forgot, how, at the monarcha__s prayer, 
We shared the lengthena__d labours of a year? 
Troy walls I raised (for such were Jovea__s commands), 
And yon proud bulwarks grew beneath my hands: 
Thy task it was to feed the bellowing droves 
Along fair Idaa__s vales and pendant groves. 
But when the circling seasons in their train 
Brought back the grateful day that crowna__d our pain, 
With menace stern the fraudful king defied 
Our latent godhead, and the prize denied: 
Mad as he was, he threatena__d servile bands, 
And dooma__d us exiles far in barbarous lands.273 
[pg 386] 
Incensed, we heavenward fled with swiftest wing, 
And destined vengeance on the perjured king. 
Dost thou, for this, afford proud Ilion grace, 
And not, like us, infest the faithless race; 
Like us, their present, future sons destroy, 
And from its deep foundations heave their Troy?a__ 
Apollo thus: a_oeTo combat for mankind 
Ill suits the wisdom of celestial mind; 
For what is man? Calamitous by birth, 
They owe their life and nourishment to earth; 
Like yearly leaves, that now, with beauty crowna__d, 
Smile on the sun; now, wither on the ground. 
To their own hands commit the frantic scene, 
Nor mix immortals in a cause so mean.a__ 
Then turns his face, far-beaming heavenly fires, 
And from the senior power submiss retires: 
Him thus retreating, Artemis upbraids, 
The quivera__d huntress of the sylvan shades: 
a_oeAnd is it thus the youthful Phoebus flies, 
And yields to oceana__s hoary sire the prize? 
How vain that martial pomp, and dreadful show 
Of pointed arrows and the silver bow! 
Now boast no more in yon celestial bower, 
Thy force can match the great earth-shaking power.a__ 
Silent he heard the queen of woods upbraid: 
Not so Saturnia bore the vaunting maid: 
But furious thus: a_oeWhat insolence has driven 
Thy pride to face the majesty of heaven? 
What though by Jove the female plague designa__d, 
Fierce to the feeble race of womankind, 
The wretched matron feels thy piercing dart; 
Thy sexa__s tyrant, with a tigera__s heart? 
What though tremendous in the woodland chase 
Thy certain arrows pierce the savage race? 
How dares thy rashness on the powers divine 
Employ those arms, or match thy force with mine? 
Learn hence, no more unequal war to wagea_"a__ 
She said, and seized her wrists with eager rage; 
These in her left hand locka__d, her right untied 
The bow, the quiver, and its plumy pride. 
About her temples flies the busy bow; 
Now here, now there, she winds her from the blow; 
The scattering arrows, rattling from the case, 
Drop round, and idly mark the dusty place. 
Swift from the field the baffled huntress flies, 
And scarce restrains the torrent in her eyes: 
So, when the falcon wings her way above, 
To the cleft cavern speeds the gentle dove; 
(Not fated yet to die;) there safe retreats, 
Yet still her heart against the marble beats. 
To her Latona hastes with tender care; 
[pg 387] 
Whom Hermes viewing, thus declines the war: 
a_oeHow shall I face the dame, who gives delight 
To him whose thunders blacken heaven with night? 
Go, matchless goddess! triumph in the skies, 
And boast my conquest, while I yield the prize.a__ 
He spoke; and passa__d: Latona, stooping low, 
Collects the scattera__d shafts and fallen bow, 
That, glittering on the dust, lay here and there 
Dishonoura__d relics of Dianaa__s war: 
Then swift pursued her to her blest abode, 
Where, all confused, she sought the sovereign god; 
Weeping, she graspa__d his knees: the ambrosial vest 
Shook with her sighs, and panted on her breast. 
The sire superior smiled, and bade her show 
What heavenly hand had caused his daughtera__s woe? 
Abasha__d, she names his own imperial spouse; 
And the pale crescent fades upon her brows. 
Thus they above: while, swiftly gliding down, 
Apollo enters Iliona__s sacred town; 
The guardian-god now trembled for her wall, 
And feara__d the Greeks, though fate forbade her fall. 
Back to Olympus, from the wara__s alarms, 
Return the shining bands of gods in arms; 
Some proud in triumph, some with rage on fire; 
And take their thrones around the ethereal sire. 
Through blood, through death, Achilles still proceeds, 
Oa__er slaughtera__d heroes, and oa__er rolling steeds. 
As when avenging flames with fury driven 
On guilty towns exert the wrath of heaven; 
The pale inhabitants, some fall, some fly; 
And the red vapours purple all the sky: 
So raged Achilles: death and dire dismay, 
And toils, and terrors, filla__d the dreadful day. 
High on a turret hoary Priam stands, 
And marks the waste of his destructive hands; 
Views, from his arm, the Trojansa__ scattera__d flight, 
And the near hero rising on his sight! 
No stop, no check, no aid! With feeble pace, 
And settled sorrow on his aged face, 
Fast as he could, he sighing quits the walls; 
And thus descending, on the guards he calls: 
a_oeYou to whose care our city-gates belong, 
Set wide your portals to the flying throng: 
For lo! he comes, with unresisted sway; 
He comes, and desolation marks his way! 
But when within the walls our troops take breath, 
Lock fast the brazen bars, and shut out death.a__ 
Thus charged the reverend monarch: wide were flung 
The opening folds; the sounding hinges rung. 
Phoebus rusha__d forth, the flying bands to meet; 
[pg 388] 
Struck slaughter back, and covera__d the retreat, 
On heaps the Trojans crowd to gain the gate, 
And gladsome see their last escape from fate. 
Thither, all parcha__d with thirst, a heartless train, 
Hoary with dust, they beat the hollow plain: 
And gasping, panting, fainting, labour on 
With heavier strides, that lengthen toward the town. 
Enraged Achilles follows with his spear; 
Wild with revenge, insatiable of war. 
Then had the Greeks eternal praise acquired, 
And Troy inglorious to her walls retired; 
But he, the god who darts ethereal flame, 
Shot down to save her, and redeem her fame: 
To young Agenor force divine he gave; 
(Antenora__s offspring, haughty, bold, and brave;) 
In aid of him, beside the beech he sate, 
And wrapt in clouds, restraina__d the hand of fate. 
When now the generous youth Achilles spies. 
Thick beats his heart, the troubled motions rise. 
(So, ere a storm, the waters heave and roll.) 
He stops, and questions thus his mighty soul; 
a_oeWhat, shall I fly this terror of the plain! 
Like others fly, and be like others slain? 
Vain hope! to shun him by the self-same road 
Yon line of slaughtera__d Trojans lately trod. 
No: with the common heap I scorn to falla_" 
What if they passa__d me to the Trojan wall, 
While I decline to yonder path, that leads 
To Idaa__s forests and surrounding shades? 
So may I reach, conceala__d, the cooling flood, 
From my tired body wash the dirt and blood, 
As soon as night her dusky veil extends, 
Return in safety to my Trojan friends. 
What if?a_"But wherefore all this vain debate? 
Stand I to doubt, within the reach of fate? 
Even now perhaps, ere yet I turn the wall, 
The fierce Achilles sees me, and I fall: 
Such is his swiftness, a__tis in vain to fly, 
And such his valour, that who stands must die. 
Howea__er a__tis better, fighting for the state, 
Here, and in public view, to meet my fate. 
Yet sure he too is mortal; he may feel 
(Like all the sons of earth) the force of steel. 
One only soul informs that dreadful frame: 
And Jovea__s sole favour gives him all his fame.a__ 
He said, and stood, collected, in his might; 
And all his beating bosom claima__d the fight. 
So from some deep-grown wood a panther starts, 
Roused from his thicket by a storm of darts: 
Untaught to fear or fly, he hears the sounds 
[pg 389] 
Of shouting hunters, and of clamorous hounds; 
Though struck, though wounded, scarce perceives the pain; 
And the barba__d javelin stings his breast in vain: 
On their whole war, untamed, the savage flies; 
And tears his hunter, or beneath him dies. 
Not less resolved, Antenora__s valiant heir 
Confronts Achilles, and awaits the war, 
Disdainful of retreat: high held before, 
His shield (a broad circumference) he bore; 
Then graceful as he stood, in act to throw 
The lifted javelin, thus bespoke the foe: 
a_oeHow proud Achilles glories in his fame! 
And hopes this day to sink the Trojan name 
Beneath her ruins! Know, that hope is vain; 
A thousand woes, a thousand toils remain. 
Parents and children our just arms employ, 
And strong and many are the sons of Troy. 
Great as thou art, even thou maya__st stain with gore 
These Phrygian fields, and press a foreign shore.a__ 
He said: with matchless force the javelin flung 
Smote on his knee; the hollow cuishes rung 
Beneath the pointed steel; but safe from harms 
He stands impassive in the ethereal arms. 
Then fiercely rushing on the daring foe, 
His lifted arm prepares the fatal blow: 
But, jealous of his fame, Apollo shrouds 
The god-like Trojan in a veil of clouds. 
Safe from pursuit, and shut from mortal view, 
Dismissa__d with fame, the favoured youth withdrew. 
Meanwhile the god, to cover their escape, 
Assumes Agenora__s habit, voice and shape, 
Flies from the furious chief in this disguise; 
The furious chief still follows where he flies. 
Now oa__er the fields they stretch with lengthena__d strides, 
Now urge the course where swift Scamander glides: 
The god, now distant scarce a stride before, 
Tempts his pursuit, and wheels about the shore; 
While all the flying troops their speed employ, 
And pour on heaps into the walls of Troy: 
No stop, no stay; no thought to ask, or tell, 
Who a__scaped by flight, or who by battle fell. 
a__Twas tumult all, and violence of flight; 
And sudden joy confused, and mixa__d affright. 
Pale Troy against Achilles shuts her gate: 
And nations breathe, delivera__d from their fate. 
[pg 390] 
BOOK XXII. 
ARGUMENT. 
THE DEATH OF HECTOR. 
The Trojans being safe within the walls, Hector only stays to oppose 
Achilles. Priam is struck at his approach, and tries to persuade his 
son to re-enter the town. Hecuba joins her entreaties, but in vain. 
Hector consults within himself what measures to take; but at the 
advance of Achilles, his resolution fails him, and he flies. Achilles 
pursues him thrice round the walls of Troy. The gods debate concerning 
the fate of Hector; at length Minerva descends to the aid of Achilles. 
She deludes Hector in the shape of Deiphobus; he stands the combat, and 
is slain. Achilles drags the dead body at his chariot in the sight of 
Priam and Hecuba. Their lamentations, tears, and despair. Their cries 
reach the ears of Andromache, who, ignorant of this, was retired into 
the inner part of the palace: she mounts up to the walls, and beholds 
her dead husband. She swoons at the spectacle. Her excess of grief and 
lamentation. 
The thirtieth day still continues. The scene lies under the walls, and 
on the battlements of Troy. 
Thus to their bulwarks, smit with panic fear, 
The herded Ilians rush like driven deer: 
There safe they wipe the briny drops away, 
And drown in bowls the labours of the day. 
Close to the walls, advancing oa__er the fields 
Beneath one roof of well-compacted shields, 
March, bending on, the Greeksa__ embodied powers, 
Far stretching in the shade of Trojan towers. 
Great Hector singly staya__d: chaina__d down by fate 
There fixa__d he stood before the Scaean gate; 
Still his bold arms determined to employ, 
The guardian still of long-defended Troy. 
Apollo now to tired Achilles turns: 
(The power confessa__d in all his glory burns:) 
a_oeAnd what (he cries) has Peleusa__ son in view, 
With mortal speed a godhead to pursue? 
For not to thee to know the gods is given, 
Unskilla__d to trace the latent marks of heaven. 
What boots thee now, that Troy forsook the plain? 
Vain thy past labour, and thy present vain: 
[pg 391] 
Safe in their walls are now her troops bestowa__d, 
While here thy frantic rage attacks a god.a__ 
The chief incenseda_"a_oeToo partial god of day! 
To check my conquests in the middle way: 
How few in Ilion else had refuge found! 
What gasping numbers now had bit the ground! 
Thou robba__st me of a glory justly mine, 
Powerful of godhead, and of fraud divine: 
Mean fame, alas! for one of heavenly strain, 
To cheat a mortal who repines in vain.a__ 
Then to the city, terrible and strong, 
With high and haughty steps he towera__d along, 
So the proud courser, victor of the prize, 
To the near goal with double ardour flies. 
Him, as he blazing shot across the field, 
The careful eyes of Priam first beheld. 
Not half so dreadful rises to the sight,274 
Through the thick gloom of some tempestuous night, 
Oriona__s dog (the year when autumn weighs), 
And oa__er the feebler stars exerts his rays; 
Terrific glory! for his burning breath 
Taints the red air with fevers, plagues, and death. 
So flamed his fiery mail. Then wept the sage: 
He strikes his reverend head, now white with age; 
He lifts his withera__d arms; obtests the skies; 
He calls his much-loved son with feeble cries: 
The son, resolved Achillesa__ force to dare, 
Full at the Scaean gates expects the war; 
While the sad father on the rampart stands, 
And thus adjures him with extended hands: 
a_oeAh stay not, stay not! guardless and alone; 
Hector! my loved, my dearest, bravest son! 
Methinks already I behold thee slain, 
And stretcha__d beneath that fury of the plain. 
Implacable Achilles! mighta__st thou be 
To all the gods no dearer than to me! 
Thee, vultures wild should scatter round the shore. 
And bloody dogs grow fiercer from thy gore. 
How many valiant sons I late enjoya__d, 
Valiant in vain! by thy cursed arm destroya__d: 
Or, worse than slaughtered, sold in distant isles 
To shameful bondage, and unworthy toils. 
Two, while I speak, my eyes in vain explore, 
Two from one mother sprung, my Polydore, 
[pg 392] 
And loved Lycaon; now perhaps no more! 
Oh! if in yonder hostile camp they live, 
What heaps of gold, what treasures would I give! 
(Their grandsirea__s wealth, by right of birth their own, 
Consigna__d his daughter with Lelegiaa__s throne:) 
But if (which Heaven forbid) already lost, 
All pale they wander on the Stygian coast; 
What sorrows then must their sad mother know, 
What anguish I? unutterable woe! 
Yet less that anguish, less to her, to me, 
Less to all Troy, if not deprived of thee. 
Yet shun Achilles! enter yet the wall; 
And spare thyself, thy father, spare us all! 
Save thy dear life; or, if a soul so brave 
Neglect that thought, thy dearer glory save. 
Pity, while yet I live, these silver hairs; 
While yet thy father feels the woes he bears, 
Yet cursed with sense! a wretch, whom in his rage 
(All trembling on the verge of helpless age) 
Great Jove has placed, sad spectacle of pain! 
The bitter dregs of fortunea__s cup to drain: 
To fill with scenes of death his closing eyes, 
And number all his days by miseries! 
My heroes slain, my bridal bed oa__erturna__d, 
My daughters ravisha__d, and my city burna__d, 
My bleeding infants dasha__d against the floor; 
These I have yet to see, perhaps yet more! 
Perhaps even I, reserved by angry fate, 
The last sad relic of my ruina__d state, 
(Dire pomp of sovereign wretchedness!) must fall, 
And stain the pavement of my regal hall; 
Where famisha__d dogs, late guardians of my door, 
Shall lick their mangled mastera__s spattera__d gore. 
Yet for my sons I thank ye, gods! a__tis well; 
Well have they perisha__d, for in fight they fell. 
Who dies in youth and vigour, dies the best, 
Struck through with wounds, all honest on the breast. 
But when the fates, in fulness of their rage, 
Spurn the hoar head of unresisting age, 
In dust the reverend lineaments deform, 
And pour to dogs the life-blood scarcely warm: 
This, this is misery! the last, the worse, 
That man can feel! man, fated to be cursed!a__ 
He said, and acting what no words could say, 
Rent from his head the silver locks away. 
With him the mournful mother bears a part; 
Yet all her sorrows turn not Hectora__s heart. 
The zone unbraced, her bosom she displaya__d; 
And thus, fast-falling the salt tears, she said: 
a_oeHave mercy on me, O my son! revere 
[pg 393] 
The words of age; attend a parenta__s prayer! 
If ever thee in these fond arms I pressa__d, 
Or stilla__d thy infant clamours at this breast; 
Ah do not thus our helpless years forego, 
But, by our walls secured, repel the foe. 
Against his rage if singly thou proceed, 
Shoulda__st thou, (but Heaven avert it!) shoulda__st thou bleed, 
Nor must thy corse lie honoura__d on the bier, 
Nor spouse, nor mother, grace thee with a tear! 
Far from our pious rites those dear remains 
Must feast the vultures on the naked plains.a__ 
So they, while down their cheeks the torrents roll; 
But fixa__d remains the purpose of his soul; 
Resolved he stands, and with a fiery glance 
Expects the heroa__s terrible advance. 
So, rolla__d up in his den, the swelling snake 
Beholds the traveller approach the brake; 
When fed with noxious herbs his turgid veins 
Have gathera__d half the poisons of the plains; 
He burns, he stiffens with collected ire, 
And his red eyeballs glare with living fire. 
Beneath a turret, on his shield reclined, 
He stood, and questiona__d thus his mighty mind:275 
a_oeWhere lies my way? to enter in the wall? 
Honour and shame the ungenerous thought recall: 
Shall proud Polydamas before the gate 
Proclaim, his counsels are obeya__d too late, 
Which timely followa__d but the former night, 
What numbers had been saved by Hectora__s flight? 
That wise advice rejected with disdain, 
I feel my folly in my people slain. 
Methinks my suffering countrya__s voice I hear, 
But most her worthless sons insult my ear, 
On my rash courage charge the chance of war, 
And blame those virtues which they cannot share. 
Noa_"if I ea__er return, return I must 
Glorious, my countrya__s terror laid in dust: 
Or if I perish, let her see me fall 
In field at least, and fighting for her wall. 
And yet suppose these measures I forego, 
Approach unarma__d, and parley with the foe, 
The warrior-shield, the helm, and lance, lay down. 
And treat on terms of peace to save the town: 
The wife withheld, the treasure ill-detaina__d 
(Cause of the war, and grievance of the land) 
With honourable justice to restore: 
And add half Iliona__s yet remaining store, 
Which Troy shall, sworn, produce; that injured Greece 
May share our wealth, and leave our walls in peace. 
[pg 394] 
But why this thought? Unarma__d if I should go, 
What hope of mercy from this vengeful foe, 
But woman-like to fall, and fall without a blow? 
We greet not here, as man conversing man, 
Met at an oak, or journeying oa__er a plain; 
No season now for calm familiar talk, 
Like youths and maidens in an evening walk: 
War is our business, but to whom is given 
To die, or triumph, that, determine Heaven!a__ 
Thus pondering, like a god the Greek drew nigh; 
His dreadful plumage nodded from on high; 
The Pelian javelin, in his better hand, 
Shot trembling rays that glittera__d oa__er the land; 
And on his breast the beamy splendour shone, 
Like Jovea__s own lightning, or the rising sun. 
As Hector sees, unusual terrors rise, 
Struck by some god, he fears, recedes, and flies. 
He leaves the gates, he leaves the wall behind: 
Achilles follows like the winged wind. 
Thus at the panting dove a falcon flies 
(The swiftest racer of the liquid skies), 
Just when he holds, or thinks he holds his prey, 
Obliquely wheeling through the aerial way, 
With open beak and shrilling cries he springs, 
And aims his claws, and shoots upon his wings: 
No less fore-right the rapid chase they held, 
One urged by fury, one by fear impella__d: 
Now circling round the walls their course maintain, 
Where the high watch-tower overlooks the plain; 
Now where the fig-trees spread their umbrage broad, 
(A wider compass,) smoke along the road. 
Next by Scamandera__s double source they bound, 
Where two famed fountains burst the parted ground; 
This hot through scorching clefts is seen to rise, 
With exhalations steaming to the skies; 
That the green banks in summera__s heat oa__erflows, 
Like crystal clear, and cold as winter snows: 
Each gushing fount a marble cistern fills, 
Whose polisha__d bed receives the falling rills; 
Where Trojan dames (ere yet alarma__d by Greece) 
Washa__d their fair garments in the days of peace.276 
By these they passa__d, one chasing, one in flight: 
(The mighty fled, pursued by stronger might:) 
Swift was the course; no vulgar prize they play, 
No vulgar victim must reward the day: 
(Such as in races crown the speedy strife:) 
The prize contended was great Hectora__s life. 
[pg 395] 
As when some heroa__s funerals are decreed 
In grateful honour of the mighty dead; 
Where high rewards the vigorous youth inflame 
(Some golden tripod, or some lovely dame) 
The panting coursers swiftly turn the goal, 
And with them turns the raised spectatora__s soul: 
Thus three times round the Trojan wall they fly. 
The gazing gods lean forward from the sky; 
To whom, while eager on the chase they look, 
The sire of mortals and immortals spoke: 
a_oeUnworthy sight! the man beloved of heaven, 
Behold, inglorious round yon city driven! 
My heart partakes the generous Hectora__s pain; 
Hector, whose zeal whole hecatombs has slain, 
Whose grateful fumes the gods received with joy, 
From Idaa__s summits, and the towers of Troy: 
Now see him flying; to his fears resigna__d, 
And fate, and fierce Achilles, close behind. 
Consult, ye powers! (a__tis worthy your debate) 
Whether to snatch him from impending fate, 
Or let him bear, by stern Pelides slain, 
(Good as he is) the lot imposed on man.a__ 
Then Pallas thus: a_oeShall he whose vengeance forms 
The forky bolt, and blackens heaven with storms, 
Shall he prolong one Trojana__s forfeit breath? 
A man, a mortal, pre-ordaina__d to death! 
And will no murmurs fill the courts above? 
No gods indignant blame their partial Jove?a__ 
a_oeGo then (returna__d the sire) without delay, 
Exert thy will: I give the Fates their way. 
Swift at the mandate pleased Tritonia flies, 
And stoops impetuous from the cleaving skies. 
As through the forest, oa__er the vale and lawn, 
The well-breatha__d beagle drives the flying fawn, 
In vain he tries the covert of the brakes, 
Or deep beneath the trembling thicket shakes; 
Sure of the vapour in the tainted dews, 
The certain hound his various maze pursues. 
Thus step by step, wherea__er the Trojan wheela__d, 
There swift Achilles compassa__d round the field. 
Oft as to reach the Dardan gates he bends, 
And hopes the assistance of his pitying friends, 
(Whose showering arrows, as he coursed below, 
From the high turrets might oppress the foe,) 
So oft Achilles turns him to the plain: 
He eyes the city, but he eyes in vain. 
As men in slumbers seem with speedy pace, 
One to pursue, and one to lead the chase, 
Their sinking limbs the fancied course forsake, 
Nor this can fly, nor that can overtake: 
[pg 396] 
No less the labouring heroes pant and strain: 
While that but flies, and this pursues in vain. 
What god, O muse, assisted Hectora__s force 
With fate itself so long to hold the course? 
Phoebus it was; who, in his latest hour, 
Endued his knees with strength, his nerves with power: 
And great Achilles, lest some Greeka__s advance 
Should snatch the glory from his lifted lance, 
Signa__d to the troops to yield his foe the way, 
And leave untoucha__d the honours of the day. 
Jove lifts the golden balances, that show 
The fates of mortal men, and things below: 
Here each contending heroa__s lot he tries, 
And weighs, with equal hand, their destinies. 
Low sinks the scale surcharged with Hectora__s fate; 
Heavy with death it sinks, and hell receives the weight. 
Then Phoebus left him. Fierce Minerva flies 
To stern Pelides, and triumphing, cries: 
a_oeO loved of Jove! this day our labours cease, 
And conquest blazes with full beams on Greece. 
Great Hector falls; that Hector famed so far, 
Drunk with renown, insatiable of war, 
Falls by thy hand, and mine! nor force, nor flight, 
Shall more avail him, nor his god of light. 
See, where in vain he supplicates above, 
Rolla__d at the feet of unrelenting Jove; 
Rest here: myself will lead the Trojan on, 
And urge to meet the fate he cannot shun.a__ 
Her voice divine the chief with joyful mind 
Obeya__d; and rested, on his lance reclined 
While like Deiphobus the martial dame 
(Her face, her gesture, and her arms the same), 
In show an aid, by hapless Hectora__s side 
Approacha__d, and greets him thus with voice belied: 
a_oeToo long, O Hector! have I borne the sight 
Of this distress, and sorrowa__d in thy flight: 
It fits us now a noble stand to make, 
And here, as brothers, equal fates partake.a__ 
Then he: a_oeO prince! allied in blood and fame, 
Dearer than all that own a brothera__s name; 
Of all that Hecuba to Priam bore, 
Long tried, long loved: much loved, but honoured more! 
Since you, of all our numerous race alone 
Defend my life, regardless of your own.a__ 
Again the goddess: a_oeMuch my fathera__s prayer, 
And much my mothera__s, pressa__d me to forbear: 
My friends embraced my knees, adjured my stay, 
But stronger love impella__d, and I obey. 
Come then, the glorious conflict let us try, 
Let the steel sparkle, and the javelin fly; 
[pg 397] 
Or let us stretch Achilles on the field, 
Or to his arm our bloody trophies yield.a__ 
Fraudful she said; then swiftly marcha__d before: 
The Dardan hero shuns his foe no more. 
Sternly they met. The silence Hector broke: 
His dreadful plumage nodded as he spoke: 
a_oeEnough, O son of Peleus! Troy has viewa__d 
Her walls thrice circled, and her chief pursued. 
But now some god within me bids me try 
Thine, or my fate: I kill thee, or I die. 
Yet on the verge of battle let us stay, 
And for a momenta__s space suspend the day; 
Let Heavena__s high powers be calla__d to arbitrate 
The just conditions of this stern debate, 
(Eternal witnesses of all below, 
And faithful guardians of the treasured vow!) 
To them I swear; if, victor in the strife, 
Jove by these hands shall shed thy noble life, 
No vile dishonour shall thy corse pursue; 
Strippa__d of its arms alone (the conquerora__s due) 
The rest to Greece uninjured Ia__ll restore: 
Now plight thy mutual oath, I ask no more.a__ 
a_oeTalk not of oaths (the dreadful chief replies, 
While anger flasha__d from his disdainful eyes), 
Detested as thou art, and ought to be, 
Nor oath nor pact Achilles plights with thee: 
Such pacts as lambs and rabid wolves combine, 
Such leagues as men and furious lions join, 
To such I call the gods! one constant state 
Of lasting rancour and eternal hate: 
No thought but rage, and never-ceasing strife, 
Till death extinguish rage, and thought, and life. 
Rouse then thy forces this important hour, 
Collect thy soul, and call forth all thy power. 
No further subterfuge, no further chance; 
a__Tis Pallas, Pallas gives thee to my lance. 
Each Grecian ghost, by thee deprived of breath, 
Now hovers round, and calls thee to thy death.a__ 
He spoke, and launcha__d his javelin at the foe; 
But Hector shunna__d the meditated blow: 
He stoopa__d, while oa__er his head the flying spear 
Sang innocent, and spent its force in air. 
Minerva watcha__d it falling on the land, 
Then drew, and gave to great Achillesa__ hand, 
Unseen of Hector, who, elate with joy, 
Now shakes his lance, and braves the dread of Troy. 
a_oeThe life you boasted to that javelin given, 
Prince! you have missa__d. My fate depends on Heaven, 
To thee, presumptuous as thou art, unknown, 
Or what must prove my fortune, or thy own. 
[pg 398] 
Boasting is but an art, our fears to blind, 
And with false terrors sink anothera__s mind. 
But know, whatever fate I am to try, 
By no dishonest wound shall Hector die. 
I shall not fall a fugitive at least, 
My soul shall bravely issue from my breast. 
But first, try thou my arm; and may this dart 
End all my countrya__s woes, deep buried in thy heart.a__ 
The weapon flew, its course unerring held, 
Unerring, but the heavenly shield repella__d 
The mortal dart; resulting with a bound 
From off the ringing orb, it struck the ground. 
Hector beheld his javelin fall in vain, 
Nor other lance, nor other hope remain; 
He calls Deiphobus, demands a speara_" 
In vain, for no Deiphobus was there. 
All comfortless he stands: then, with a sigh; 
a_oea__Tis soa_"Heaven wills it, and my hour is nigh! 
I deema__d Deiphobus had heard my call, 
But he secure lies guarded in the wall. 
A god deceived me; Pallas, a__twas thy deed, 
Death and black fate approach! a__tis I must bleed. 
No refuge now, no succour from above, 
Great Jove deserts me, and the son of Jove, 
Propitious once, and kind! Then welcome fate! 
a__Tis true I perish, yet I perish great: 
Yet in a mighty deed I shall expire, 
Let future ages hear it, and admire!a__ 
Fierce, at the word, his weighty sword he drew, 
And, all collected, on Achilles flew. 
So Jovea__s bold bird, high balanced in the air, 
Stoops from the clouds to truss the quivering hare. 
Nor less Achilles his fierce soul prepares: 
Before his breast the flaming shield he bears, 
Refulgent orb! above his fourfold cone 
The gilded horse-hair sparkled in the sun. 
Nodding at every step: (Vulcanian frame!) 
And as he moved, his figure seema__d on flame. 
As radiant Hesper shines with keener light,277 
Far-beaming oa__er the silver host of night, 
When all the starry train emblaze the sphere: 
So shone the point of great Achillesa__ spear. 
In his right hand he waves the weapon round, 
Eyes the whole man, and meditates the wound; 
But the rich mail Patroclus lately wore 
Securely cased the warriora__s body oa__er. 
One space at length he spies, to let in fate, 
[pg 399] 
Where a__twixt the neck and throat the jointed plate 
Gave entrance: through that penetrable part 
Furious he drove the well-directed dart: 
Nor pierced the windpipe yet, nor took the power 
Of speech, unhappy! from thy dying hour. 
Prone on the field the bleeding warrior lies, 
While, thus triumphing, stern Achilles cries: 
a_oeAt last is Hector stretcha__d upon the plain, 
Who feara__d no vengeance for Patroclus slain: 
Then, prince! you should have feara__d, what now you feel; 
Achilles absent was Achilles still: 
Yet a short space the great avenger stayed, 
Then low in dust thy strength and glory laid. 
Peaceful he sleeps, with all our rites adorna__d, 
For ever honoura__d, and for ever mourna__d: 
While cast to all the rage of hostile power, 
Thee birds shall mangle, and the gods devour.a__ 
Then Hector, fainting at the approach of death: 
a_oeBy thy own soul! by those who gave thee breath! 
By all the sacred prevalence of prayer; 
Ah, leave me not for Grecian dogs to tear! 
The common rites of sepulture bestow, 
To soothe a fathera__s and a mothera__s woe: 
Let their large gifts procure an urn at least, 
And Hectora__s ashes in his country rest.a__ 
a_oeNo, wretch accursed! relentless he replies; 
(Flames, as he spoke, shot flashing from his eyes;) 
Not those who gave me breath should bid me spare, 
Nor all the sacred prevalence of prayer. 
Could I myself the bloody banquet join! 
Noa_"to the dogs that carcase I resign. 
Should Troy, to bribe me, bring forth all her store, 
And giving thousands, offer thousands more; 
Should Dardan Priam, and his weeping dame, 
Drain their whole realm to buy one funeral flame: 
Their Hector on the pile they should not see, 
Nor rob the vultures of one limb of thee.a__ 
Then thus the chief his dying accents drew: 
a_oeThy rage, implacable! too well I knew: 
The Furies that relentless breast have steela__d, 
And cursed thee with a heart that cannot yield. 
Yet think, a day will come, when fatea__s decree 
And angry gods shall wreak this wrong on thee; 
Phoebus and Paris shall avenge my fate, 
And stretch thee here before the Scaean gate.a__278 
[pg 400] 
He ceased. The Fates suppressa__d his labouring breath, 
And his eyes stiffena__d at the hand of death; 
To the dark realm the spirit wings its way, 
(The manly body left a load of clay,) 
And plaintive glides along the dreary coast, 
A naked, wandering, melancholy ghost! 
Achilles, musing as he rolla__d his eyes 
Oa__er the dead hero, thus unheard, replies: 
a_oeDie thou the first! When Jove and heaven ordain, 
I follow theea__a_"He said, and strippa__d the slain. 
Then forcing backward from the gaping wound 
The reeking javelin, cast it on the ground. 
The thronging Greeks behold with wondering eyes 
His manly beauty and superior size; 
While some, ignobler, the great dead deface 
With wounds ungenerous, or with taunts disgrace: 
a_oeHow changed that Hector, who like Jove of late 
Sent lightning on our fleets, and scattera__d fate!a__ 
High oa__er the slain the great Achilles stands, 
Begirt with heroes and surrounding bands; 
And thus aloud, while all the host attends: 
a_oePrinces and leaders! countrymen and friends! 
Since now at length the powerful will of heaven 
The dire destroyer to our arm has given, 
Is not Troy fallen already? Haste, ye powers! 
See, if already their deserted towers 
Are left unmanna__d; or if they yet retain 
The souls of heroes, their great Hector slain. 
But what is Troy, or glory what to me? 
Or why reflects my mind on aught but thee, 
Divine Patroclus! Death hath seala__d his eyes; 
Unwept, unhonoura__d, uninterra__d he lies! 
Can his dear image from my soul depart, 
Long as the vital spirit moves my heart? 
If in the melancholy shades below, 
The flames of friends and lovers cease to glow, 
Yet mine shall sacred last; mine, undecaya__d, 
Burn on through death, and animate my shade. 
Meanwhile, ye sons of Greece, in triumph bring 
The corpse of Hector, and your paeans sing. 
Be this the song, slow-moving toward the shore, 
a_oeHector is dead, and Ilion is no more.a__ 
Then his fell soul a thought of vengeance bred; 
(Unworthy of himself, and of the dead;) 
The nervous ancles bored, his feet he bound 
With thongs inserted through the double wound; 
These fixa__d up high behind the rolling wain, 
His graceful head was traila__d along the plain. 
Proud on his car the insulting victor stood, 
And bore aloft his arms, distilling blood. 
[pg 401] 
He smites the steeds; the rapid chariot flies; 
The sudden clouds of circling dust arise. 
Now lost is all that formidable air; 
The face divine, and long-descending hair, 
Purple the ground, and streak the sable sand; 
Deforma__d, dishonoura__d, in his native land, 
Given to the rage of an insulting throng, 
And, in his parentsa__ sight, now dragga__d along! 
The mother first beheld with sad survey; 
She rent her tresses, venerable grey, 
And cast, far off, the regal veils away. 
With piercing shrieks his bitter fate she moans, 
While the sad father answers groans with groans 
Tears after tears his mournful cheeks oa__erflow, 
And the whole city wears one face of woe: 
No less than if the rage of hostile fires. 
From her foundations curling to her spires, 
Oa__er the proud citadel at length should rise, 
And the last blaze send Ilion to the skies. 
The wretched monarch of the falling state, 
Distracted, presses to the Dardan gate. 
Scarce the whole people stop his desperate course, 
While strong affliction gives the feeble force: 
Grief tears his heart, and drives him to and fro, 
In all the raging impotence of woe. 
At length he rolla__d in dust, and thus begun, 
Imploring all, and naming one by one: 
a_oeAh! let me, let me go where sorrow calls; 
I, only I, will issue from your walls 
(Guide or companion, friends! I ask ye none), 
And bow before the murderer of my son. 
My grief perhaps his pity may engage; 
Perhaps at least he may respect my age. 
He has a father too; a man like me; 
One, not exempt from age and misery 
(Vigorous no more, as when his young embrace 
Begot this pest of me, and all my race). 
How many valiant sons, in early bloom, 
Has that cursed hand send headlong to the tomb! 
Thee, Hector! last: thy loss (divinely brave) 
Sinks my sad soul with sorrow to the grave. 
O had thy gentle spirit passa__d in peace, 
The son expiring in the sirea__s embrace, 
While both thy parents wept the fatal hour, 
And, bending oa__er thee, mixa__d the tender shower! 
Some comfort that had been, some sad relief, 
To melt in full satiety of grief!a__ 
Thus waila__d the father, grovelling on the ground, 
And all the eyes of Ilion streama__d around. 
Amidst her matrons Hecuba appears: 
[pg 402] 
(A mourning princess, and a train in tears;) 
a_oeAh why has Heaven prolonga__d this hated breath, 
Patient of horrors, to behold thy death? 
O Hector! late thy parentsa__ pride and joy, 
The boast of nations! the defence of Troy! 
To whom her safety and her fame she owed; 
Her chief, her hero, and almost her god! 
O fatal change! become in one sad day 
A senseless corse! inanimated clay!a__ 
But not as yet the fatal news had spread 
To fair Andromache, of Hector dead; 
As yet no messenger had told his fate, 
Not ea__en his stay without the Scaean gate. 
Far in the close recesses of the dome, 
Pensive she plied the melancholy loom; 
A growing work employa__d her secret hours, 
Confusedly gay with intermingled flowers. 
Her fair-haired handmaids heat the brazen urn, 
The bath preparing for her lorda__s return 
In vain; alas! her lord returns no more; 
Unbathed he lies, and bleeds along the shore! 
Now from the walls the clamours reach her ear, 
And all her members shake with sudden fear: 
Forth from her ivory hand the shuttle falls, 
And thus, astonisha__d, to her maids she calls: 
Illustration: THE BATH. 
THE BATH. 
a_oeAh follow me! (she cried) what plaintive noise 
Invades my ear? a__Tis sure my mothera__s voice. 
My faltering knees their trembling frame desert, 
A pulse unusual flutters at my heart; 
Some strange disaster, some reverse of fate 
(Ye gods avert it!) threats the Trojan state. 
Far be the omen which my thoughts suggest! 
[pg 403] 
But much I fear my Hectora__s dauntless breast 
Confronts Achilles; chased along the plain, 
Shut from our walls! I fear, I fear him slain! 
Safe in the crowd he ever scorna__d to wait, 
And sought for glory in the jaws of fate: 
Perhaps that noble heat has cost his breath, 
Now quencha__d for ever in the arms of death.a__ 
She spoke: and furious, with distracted pace, 
Fears in her heart, and anguish in her face, 
Flies through the dome (the maids her steps pursue), 
And mounts the walls, and sends around her view. 
Too soon her eyes the killing object found, 
The godlike Hector dragga__d along the ground. 
A sudden darkness shades her swimming eyes: 
She faints, she falls; her breath, her colour flies. 
Her haira__s fair ornaments, the braids that bound, 
The net that held them, and the wreath that crowna__d, 
The veil and diadem flew far away 
(The gift of Venus on her bridal day). 
Around a train of weeping sisters stands, 
To raise her sinking with assistant hands. 
Scarce from the verge of death recalla__d, again 
She faints, or but recovers to complain. 
Illustration: ANDROMACHE FAINTING ON THE WALL. 
ANDROMACHE FAINTING ON THE WALL. 
a_oeO wretched husband of a wretched wife! 
Born with one fate, to one unhappy life! 
For sure one star its baneful beam displaya__d 
On Priama__s roof, and Hippoplaciaa__s shade. 
From different parents, different climes we came. 
At different periods, yet our fate the same! 
Why was my birth to great Aetion owed, 
And why was all that tender care bestowa__d? 
[pg 404] 
Would I had never been!a_"O thou, the ghost 
Of my dead husband! miserably lost! 
Thou to the dismal realms for ever gone! 
And I abandona__d, desolate, alone! 
An only child, once comfort of my pains, 
Sad product now of hapless love, remains! 
No more to smile upon his sire; no friend 
To help him now! no father to defend! 
For should he a__scape the sword, the common doom, 
What wrongs attend him, and what griefs to come! 
Even from his own paternal roof expella__d, 
Some stranger ploughs his patrimonial field. 
The day, that to the shades the father sends, 
Robs the sad orphan of his fathera__s friends: 
He, wretched outcast of mankind! appears 
For ever sad, for ever bathed in tears; 
Amongst the happy, unregarded, he 
Hangs on the robe, or trembles at the knee, 
While those his fathera__s former bounty fed 
Nor reach the goblet, nor divide the bread: 
The kindest but his present wants allay, 
To leave him wretched the succeeding day. 
Frugal compassion! Heedless, they who boast 
Both parents still, nor feel what he has lost, 
Shall cry, a__Begone! thy father feasts not here:a__ 
The wretch obeys, retiring with a tear. 
Thus wretched, thus retiring all in tears, 
To my sad soul Astyanax appears! 
Forced by repeated insults to return, 
And to his widowa__d mother vainly mourn: 
He, who, with tender delicacy bred, 
With princes sported, and on dainties fed, 
And when still evening gave him up to rest, 
Sunk soft in down upon the nursea__s breast, 
Musta_"ah what must he not? Whom Ilion calls 
Astyanax, from her well-guarded walls,279 
Is now that name no more, unhappy boy! 
Since now no more thy father guards his Troy. 
But thou, my Hector, liest exposed in air, 
Far from thy parentsa__ and thy consorta__s care; 
Whose hand in vain, directed by her love, 
The martial scarf and robe of triumph wove. 
Now to devouring flames be these a prey, 
Useless to thee, from this accursed day! 
Yet let the sacrifice at least be paid, 
An honour to the living, not the dead!a__ 
So spake the mournful dame: her matrons hear, 
Sigh back her sighs, and answer tear with tear. 
[pg 405] 
BOOK XXIII. 
ARGUMENT. 
FUNERAL GAMES IN HONOUR OF PATROCLUS.280 
Achilles and the Myrmidons do honours to the body of Patroclus. After 
the funeral feast he retires to the sea-shore, where, falling asleep, 
the ghost of his friend appears to him, and demands the rites of 
burial; the next morning the soldiers are sent with mules and waggons 
to fetch wood for the pyre. The funeral procession, and the offering 
their hair to the dead. Achilles sacrifices several animals, and lastly 
twelve Trojan captives, at the pile; then sets fire to it. He pays 
libations to the Winds, which (at the instance of Iris) rise, and raise 
the flames. When the pile has burned all night, they gather the bones, 
place them in an urn of gold, and raise the tomb. Achilles institutes 
the funeral games: the chariot-race, the fight of the caestus, the 
wrestling, the foot-race, the single combat, the discus, the shooting 
with arrows, the darting the javelin: the various descriptions of 
which, and the various success of the several antagonists, make the 
greatest part of the book. 
In this book ends the thirtieth day. The night following, the ghost of 
Patroclus appears to Achilles: the one-and-thirtieth day is employed in 
felling the timber for the pile: the two-and-thirtieth in burning it; 
and the three-and-thirtieth in the games. The scene is generally on the 
sea-shore. 
Thus humbled in the dust, the pensive train 
Through the sad city mourna__d her hero slain. 
The body soila__d with dust, and black with gore, 
Lies on broad Hellesponta__s resounding shore. 
The Grecians seek their ships, and clear the strand, 
All, but the martial Myrmidonian band: 
These yet assembled great Achilles holds, 
And the stern purpose of his mind unfolds: 
a_oeNot yet, my brave companions of the war, 
Release your smoking coursers from the car; 
But, with his chariot each in order led, 
Perform due honours to Patroclus dead. 
Ere yet from rest or food we seek relief, 
Some rites remain, to glut our rage of grief.a__ 
[pg 406] 
The troops obeya__d; and thrice in order led281 
(Achilles first) their coursers round the dead; 
And thrice their sorrows and laments renew; 
Tears bathe their arms, and tears the sands bedew. 
For such a warrior Thetis aids their woe, 
Melts their strong hearts, and bids their eyes to flow. 
But chief, Pelides: thick-succeeding sighs 
Burst from his heart, and torrents from his eyes: 
His slaughtering hands, yet red with blood, he laid 
On his dead frienda__s cold breast, and thus he said: 
a_oeAll hail, Patroclus! let thy honoura__d ghost 
Hear, and rejoice on Plutoa__s dreary coast; 
Behold! Achillesa__ promise is complete; 
The bloody Hector stretcha__d before thy feet. 
Lo! to the dogs his carcase I resign; 
And twelve sad victims, of the Trojan line, 
Sacred to vengeance, instant shall expire; 
Their lives effused around thy funeral pyre.a__ 
Gloomy he said, and (horrible to view) 
Before the bier the bleeding Hector threw, 
Prone on the dust. The Myrmidons around 
Unbraced their armour, and the steeds unbound. 
All to Achillesa__ sable ship repair, 
Frequent and full, the genial feast to share. 
Now from the well-fed swine black smokes aspire, 
The bristly victims hissing oa__er the fire: 
The huge ox bellowing falls; with feebler cries 
Expires the goat; the sheep in silence dies. 
Around the heroa__s prostrate body flowa__d, 
In one promiscuous stream, the reeking blood. 
And now a band of Argive monarchs brings 
The glorious victor to the king of kings. 
From his dead friend the pensive warrior went, 
With steps unwilling, to the regal tent. 
The attending heralds, as by office bound, 
With kindled flames the tripod-vase surround: 
To cleanse his conquering hands from hostile gore, 
They urged in vain; the chief refused, and swore:282 
a_oeNo drop shall touch me, by almighty Jove! 
The first and greatest of the gods above! 
Till on the pyre I place thee; till I rear 
The grassy mound, and clip thy sacred hair. 
Some ease at least those pious rites may give, 
And soothe my sorrows, while I bear to live. 
Howea__er, reluctant as I am, I stay 
And share your feast; but with the dawn of day, 
[pg 407] 
(O king of men!) it claims thy royal care, 
That Greece the warriora__s funeral pile prepare, 
And bid the forests fall: (such rites are paid 
To heroes slumbering in eternal shade:) 
Then, when his earthly part shall mount in fire, 
Let the leagued squadrons to their posts retire.a__ 
He spoke: they hear him, and the word obey; 
The rage of hunger and of thirst allay, 
Then ease in sleep the labours of the day. 
But great Pelides, stretcha__d along the shore, 
Where, dasha__d on rocks, the broken billows roar, 
Lies inly groaning; while on either hand 
The martial Myrmidons confusedly stand. 
Along the grass his languid members fall, 
Tired with his chase around the Trojan wall; 
Husha__d by the murmurs of the rolling deep, 
At length he sinks in the soft arms of sleep. 
When lo! the shade, before his closing eyes, 
Of sad Patroclus rose, or seema__d to rise: 
In the same robe he living wore, he came: 
In stature, voice, and pleasing look, the same. 
The form familiar hovera__d oa__er his head, 
a_oeAnd sleeps Achilles? (thus the phantom said:) 
Sleeps my Achilles, his Patroclus dead? 
Living, I seema__d his dearest, tenderest care, 
But now forgot, I wander in the air. 
Let my pale corse the rites of burial know, 
And give me entrance in the realms below: 
Till then the spirit finds no resting-place, 
But here and there the unbodied spectres chase 
The vagrant dead around the dark abode, 
Forbid to cross the irremeable flood. 
Now give thy hand; for to the farther shore 
When once we pass, the soul returns no more: 
When once the last funereal flames ascend, 
No more shall meet Achilles and his friend; 
No more our thoughts to those we loved make known; 
Or quit the dearest, to converse alone. 
Me fate has severa__d from the sons of earth, 
The fate fore-dooma__d that waited from my birth: 
Thee too it waits; before the Trojan wall 
Even great and godlike thou art dooma__d to fall. 
Hear then; and as in fate and love we join, 
Ah suffer that my bones may rest with thine! 
Together have we lived; together bred, 
One house received us, and one table fed; 
That golden urn, thy goddess-mother gave, 
May mix our ashes in one common grave.a__ 
a_oeAnd is it thou? (he answers) To my sight283 
[pg 408] 
Once more returna__st thou from the realms of night? 
O more than brother! Think each office paid, 
Whatea__er can rest a discontented shade; 
But grant one last embrace, unhappy boy! 
Afford at least that melancholy joy.a__ 
He said, and with his longing arms essaya__d 
In vain to grasp the visionary shade! 
Like a thin smoke he sees the spirit fly,284 
And hears a feeble, lamentable cry. 
Confused he wakes; amazement breaks the bands 
Of golden sleep, and starting from the sands, 
Pensive he muses with uplifted hands: 
a_oea__Tis true, a__tis certain; man, though dead, retains 
Part of himself; the immortal mind remains: 
The form subsists without the bodya__s aid, 
Aerial semblance, and an empty shade! 
This night my friend, so late in battle lost, 
Stood at my side, a pensive, plaintive ghost: 
Even now familiar, as in life, he came; 
Alas! how different! yet how like the same!a__ 
Thus while he spoke, each eye grew big with tears: 
And now the rosy-fingera__d morn appears, 
Shows every mournful face with tears oa__erspread, 
And glares on the pale visage of the dead. 
But Agamemnon, as the rites demand, 
With mules and waggons sends a chosen band 
To load the timber, and the pile to rear; 
A charge consigna__d to Meriona__s faithful care. 
With proper instruments they take the road, 
Axes to cut, and ropes to sling the load. 
First march the heavy mules, securely slow, 
Oa__er hills, oa__er dales, oa__er crags, oa__er rocks they go:285 
Jumping, high oa__er the shrubs of the rough ground, 
Rattle the clattering cars, and the shocka__d axles bound 
But when arrived at Idaa__s spreading woods,286 
[pg 409] 
(Fair Ida, watera__d with descending floods,) 
Loud sounds the axe, redoubling strokes on strokes; 
On all sides round the forest hurls her oaks 
Headlong. Deep echoing groan the thickets brown; 
Then rustling, crackling, crashing, thunder down. 
The wood the Grecians cleave, prepared to burn; 
And the slow mules the same rough road return 
The sturdy woodmen equal burdens bore 
(Such charge was given them) to the sandy shore; 
There on the spot which great Achilles showa__d, 
They eased their shoulders, and disposed the load; 
Circling around the place, where times to come 
Shall view Patroclusa__ and Achillesa__ tomb. 
The hero bids his martial troops appear 
High on their cars in all the pomp of war; 
Each in refulgent arms his limbs attires, 
All mount their chariots, combatants and squires. 
The chariots first proceed, a shining train; 
Then clouds of foot that smoke along the plain; 
Next these the melancholy band appear; 
Amidst, lay dead Patroclus on the bier; 
Oa__er all the corse their scattered locks they throw; 
Achilles next, oppressa__d with mighty woe, 
Supporting with his hands the heroa__s head, 
Bends oa__er the extended body of the dead. 
Patroclus decent on the appointed ground 
They place, and heap the sylvan pile around. 
But great Achilles stands apart in prayer, 
And from his head divides the yellow hair; 
Those curling locks which from his youth he vowa__d,287 
And sacred grew, to Sperchiusa__ honoura__d flood: 
Then sighing, to the deep his locks he cast, 
And rolla__d his eyes around the watery waste: 
a_oeSperchius! whose waves in mazy errors lost 
Delightful roll along my native coast! 
To whom we vainly vowa__d, at our return, 
These locks to fall, and hecatombs to burn: 
Full fifty rams to bleed in sacrifice, 
Where to the day thy silver fountains rise, 
And where in shade of consecrated bowers 
Thy altars stand, perfumed with native flowers! 
So vowa__d my father, but he vowa__d in vain; 
No more Achilles sees his native plain; 
[pg 410] 
In that vain hope these hairs no longer grow, 
Patroclus bears them to the shades below.a__ 
Thus oa__er Patroclus while the hero praya__d, 
On his cold hand the sacred lock he laid. 
Once more afresh the Grecian sorrows flow: 
And now the sun had set upon their woe; 
But to the king of men thus spoke the chief: 
a_oeEnough, Atrides! give the troops relief: 
Permit the mourning legions to retire, 
And let the chiefs alone attend the pyre; 
The pious care be ours, the dead to burna_"a__ 
He said: the people to their ships return: 
While those deputed to inter the slain 
Heap with a rising pyramid the plain.288 
A hundred foot in length, a hundred wide, 
The growing structure spreads on every side; 
High on the top the manly corse they lay, 
And well-fed sheep and sable oxen slay: 
Achilles covered with their fat the dead, 
And the piled victims round the body spread; 
Then jars of honey, and of fragrant oil, 
Suspends around, low-bending oa__er the pile. 
Four sprightly coursers, with a deadly groan 
Pour forth their lives, and on the pyre are thrown. 
Of nine large dogs, domestic at his board, 
Fall two, selected to attend their lord, 
Then last of all, and horrible to tell, 
Sad sacrifice! twelve Trojan captives fell.289 
On these the rage of fire victorious preys, 
Involves and joins them in one common blaze. 
Smeara__d with the bloody rites, he stands on high, 
And calls the spirit with a dreadful cry:290 
a_oeAll hail, Patroclus! let thy vengeful ghost 
Hear, and exult, on Plutoa__s dreary coast. 
Behold Achillesa__ promise fully paid, 
Twelve Trojan heroes offera__d to thy shade; 
But heavier fates on Hectora__s corse attend, 
Saved from the flames, for hungry dogs to rend.a__ 
So spake he, threatening: but the gods made vain 
His threat, and guard inviolate the slain: 
Celestial Venus hovera__d oa__er his head, 
And roseate unguents, heavenly fragrance! shed: 
She watcha__d him all the night and all the day, 
And drove the bloodhounds from their destined prey. 
[pg 411] 
Nor sacred Phoebus less employa__d his care; 
He poura__d around a veil of gathera__d air, 
And kept the nerves undried, the flesh entire, 
Against the solar beam and Sirian fire. 
Illustration: THE FUNERAL PILE OF PATROCLUS. 
THE FUNERAL PILE OF PATROCLUS. 
Nor yet the pile, where dead Patroclus lies, 
Smokes, nor as yet the sullen flames arise; 
But, fast beside, Achilles stood in prayer, 
Invoked the gods whose spirit moves the air, 
And victims promised, and libations cast, 
To gentle Zephyr and the Boreal blast: 
He calla__d the aerial powers, along the skies 
To breathe, and whisper to the fires to rise. 
The winged Iris heard the heroa__s call, 
And instant hastena__d to their airy hall, 
Where in old Zephyra__s open courts on high, 
Sat all the blustering brethren of the sky. 
She shone amidst them, on her painted bow; 
The rocky pavement glittera__d with the show. 
All from the banquet rise, and each invites 
The various goddess to partake the rites. 
a_oeNot so (the dame replied), I haste to go 
To sacred Ocean, and the floods below: 
Even now our solemn hecatombs attend, 
And heaven is feasting on the worlda__s green end 
With righteous Ethiops (uncorrupted train!) 
Far on the extremest limits of the main. 
But Peleusa__ son entreats, with sacrifice, 
The western spirit, and the north, to rise! 
Let on Patroclusa__ pile your blast be driven, 
And bear the blazing honours high to heaven.a__ 
[pg 412] 
Swift as the word she vanisha__d from their view; 
Swift as the word the winds tumultuous flew; 
Forth burst the stormy band with thundering roar, 
And heaps on heaps the clouds are tossa__d before. 
To the wide main then stooping from the skies, 
The heaving deeps in watery mountains rise: 
Troy feels the blast along her shaking walls, 
Till on the pile the gathera__d tempest falls. 
The structure crackles in the roaring fires, 
And all the night the plenteous flame aspires. 
All night Achilles hails Patroclusa__ soul, 
With large libations from the golden bowl. 
As a poor father, helpless and undone, 
Mourns oa__er the ashes of an only son, 
Takes a sad pleasure the last bones to burn, 
And pours in tears, ere yet they close the urn: 
So staya__d Achilles, circling round the shore, 
So watcha__d the flames, till now they flame no more. 
a__Twas when, emerging through the shades of night. 
The morning planet told the approach of light; 
And, fast behind, Auroraa__s warmer ray 
Oa__er the broad ocean poura__d the golden day: 
Then sank the blaze, the pile no longer burna__d, 
And to their caves the whistling winds returna__d: 
Across the Thracian seas their course they bore; 
The ruffled seas beneath their passage roar. 
Then parting from the pile he ceased to weep, 
And sank to quiet in the embrace of sleep, 
Exhausted with his grief: meanwhile the crowd 
Of thronging Grecians round Achilles stood; 
The tumult waked him: from his eyes he shook 
Unwilling slumber, and the chiefs bespoke: 
a_oeYe kings and princes of the Achaian name! 
First let us quench the yet remaining flame 
With sable wine; then, as the rites direct, 
The heroa__s bones with careful view select: 
(Apart, and easy to be known they lie 
Amidst the heap, and obvious to the eye: 
The rest around the margin will be seen 
Promiscuous, steeds and immolated men:) 
These wrappa__d in double cauls of fat, prepare; 
And in the golden vase dispose with care; 
There let them rest with decent honour laid, 
Till I shall follow to the infernal shade. 
Meantime erect the tomb with pious hands, 
A common structure on the humble sands: 
Hereafter Greece some nobler work may raise, 
And late posterity record our praise!a__ 
The Greeks obey; where yet the embers glow, 
Wide oa__er the pile the sable wine they throw, 
[pg 413] 
And deep subsides the ashy heap below. 
Next the white bones his sad companions place, 
With tears collected, in the golden vase. 
The sacred relics to the tent they bore; 
The urn a veil of linen covered oa__er. 
That done, they bid the sepulchre aspire, 
And cast the deep foundations round the pyre; 
High in the midst they heap the swelling bed 
Of rising earth, memorial of the dead. 
The swarming populace the chief detains, 
And leads amidst a wide extent of plains; 
There placed them round: then from the ships proceeds 
A train of oxen, mules, and stately steeds, 
Vases and tripods (for the funeral games), 
Resplendent brass, and more resplendent dames. 
First stood the prizes to reward the force 
Of rapid racers in the dusty course: 
A woman for the first, in beautya__s bloom, 
Skilla__d in the needle, and the labouring loom; 
And a large vase, where two bright handles rise, 
Of twenty measures its capacious size. 
The second victor claims a mare unbroke, 
Big with a mule, unknowing of the yoke: 
The third, a charger yet untoucha__d by flame; 
Four ample measures held the shining frame: 
Two golden talents for the fourth were placed: 
An ample double bowl contents the last. 
These in fair order ranged upon the plain, 
The hero, rising, thus addressa__d the train: 
a_oeBehold the prizes, valiant Greeks! decreed 
To the brave rulers of the racing steed; 
Prizes which none beside ourself could gain, 
Should our immortal coursers take the plain; 
(A race unrivalla__d, which from oceana__s god 
Peleus received, and on his son bestowa__d.) 
But this no time our vigour to display; 
Nor suit, with them, the games of this sad day: 
Lost is Patroclus now, that wont to deck 
Their flowing manes, and sleek their glossy neck. 
Sad, as they shared in human grief, they stand, 
And trail those graceful honours on the sand! 
Let others for the noble task prepare, 
Who trust the courser and the flying car.a__ 
Fired at his word the rival racers rise; 
But far the first Eumelus hopes the prize, 
Famed though Pieria for the fleetest breed, 
And skilla__d to manage the high-bounding steed. 
With equal ardour bold Tydides swella__d, 
The steeds of Tros beneath his yoke compella__d 
(Which late obeya__d the Dardan chiefs command, 
[pg 414] 
When scarce a god redeema__d him from his hand). 
Then Menelaus his Podargus brings, 
And the famed courser of the king of kings: 
Whom rich Echepolus (more rich than brave), 
To a__scape the wars, to Agamemnon gave, 
(A_the her name) at home to end his days; 
Base wealth preferring to eternal praise. 
Next him Antilochus demands the course 
With beating heart, and cheers his Pylian horse. 
Experienced Nestor gives his son the reins, 
Directs his judgment, and his heat restrains; 
Nor idly warns the hoary sire, nor hears 
The prudent son with unattending ears. 
a_oeMy son! though youthful ardour fire thy breast, 
The gods have loved thee, and with arts have blessa__d; 
Neptune and Jove on thee conferra__d the skill 
Swift round the goal to turn the flying wheel. 
To guide thy conduct little precept needs; 
But slow, and past their vigour, are my steeds. 
Fear not thy rivals, though for swiftness known; 
Compare those rivalsa__ judgment and thy own: 
It is not strength, but art, obtains the prize, 
And to be swift is less than to be wise. 
a__Tis more by art than force of numerous strokes 
The dexterous woodman shapes the stubborn oaks; 
By art the pilot, through the boiling deep 
And howling tempest, steers the fearless ship; 
And a__tis the artist wins the glorious course; 
Not those who trust in chariots and in horse. 
In vain, unskilful to the goal they strive, 
And short, or wide, the ungoverna__d courser drive: 
While with sure skill, though with inferior steeds, 
The knowing racer to his end proceeds; 
Fixa__d on the goal his eye foreruns the course, 
His hand unerring steers the steady horse, 
And now contracts, or now extends the rein, 
Observing still the foremost on the plain. 
Mark then the goal, a__tis easy to be found; 
Yon aged trunk, a cubit from the ground; 
Of some once stately oak the last remains, 
Or hardy fir, unperisha__d with the rains: 
Inclosed with stones, conspicuous from afar; 
And round, a circle for the wheeling car. 
(Some tomb perhaps of old, the dead to grace; 
Or then, as now, the limit of a race.) 
Bear close to this, and warily proceed, 
A little bending to the left-hand steed; 
But urge the right, and give him all the reins; 
While thy strict hand his fellowa__s head restrains, 
And turns him short; till, doubling as they roll, 
[pg 415] 
The wheela__s round naves appear to brush the goal. 
Yet (not to break the car, or lame the horse) 
Clear of the stony heap direct the course; 
Lest through incaution failing, thou mayst be 
A joy to others, a reproach to me. 
So shalt thou pass the goal, secure of mind, 
And leave unskilful swiftness far behind: 
Though thy fierce rival drove the matchless steed 
Which bore Adrastus, of celestial breed; 
Or the famed race, through all the regions known, 
That whirla__d the car of proud Laomedon.a__ 
Thus (nought unsaid) the much-advising sage 
Concludes; then sat, stiff with unwieldy age. 
Next bold Meriones was seen to rise, 
The last, but not least ardent for the prize. 
They mount their seats; the lots their place dispose 
(Rolla__d in his helmet, these Achilles throws). 
Young Nestor leads the race: Eumelus then; 
And next the brother of the king of men: 
Thy lot, Meriones, the fourth was cast; 
And, far the bravest, Diomed, was last. 
They stand in order, an impatient train: 
Pelides points the barrier on the plain, 
And sends before old Phoenix to the place, 
To mark the racers, and to judge the race. 
At once the coursers from the barrier bound; 
The lifted scourges all at once resound; 
Their heart, their eyes, their voice, they send before; 
And up the champaign thunder from the shore: 
Thick, where they drive, the dusty clouds arise, 
And the lost courser in the whirlwind flies; 
Loose on their shoulders the long manes reclined, 
Float in their speed, and dance upon the wind: 
The smoking chariots, rapid as they bound, 
Now seem to touch the sky, and now the ground. 
While hot for fame, and conquest all their care, 
(Each oa__er his flying courser hung in air,) 
Erect with ardour, poised upon the rein, 
They pant, they stretch, they shout along the plain. 
Now (the last compass fetcha__d around the goal) 
At the near prize each gathers all his soul, 
Each burns with double hope, with double pain, 
Tears up the shore, and thunders toward the main. 
First flew Eumelus on Pheretian steeds; 
With those of Tros bold Diomed succeeds: 
Close on Eumelusa__ back they puff the wind, 
And seem just mounting on his car behind; 
Full on his neck he feels the sultry breeze, 
And, hovering oa__er, their stretching shadows sees. 
Then had he lost, or left a doubtful prize; 
[pg 416] 
But angry Phoebus to Tydides flies, 
Strikes from his hand the scourge, and renders vain 
His matchless horsesa__ labour on the plain. 
Rage fills his eye with anguish, to survey 
Snatcha__d from his hope the glories of the day. 
The fraud celestial Pallas sees with pain, 
Springs to her knight, and gives the scourge again, 
And fills his steeds with vigour. At a stroke 
She breaks his rivala__s chariot from the yoke: 
No more their way the startled horses held; 
The car reversed came rattling on the field; 
Shot headlong from his seat, beside the wheel, 
Prone on the dust the unhappy master fell; 
His battera__d face and elbows strike the ground; 
Nose, mouth, and front, one undistinguisha__d wound: 
Grief stops his voice, a torrent drowns his eyes: 
Before him far the glad Tydides flies; 
Minervaa__s spirit drives his matchless pace, 
And crowns him victor of the laboura__d race. 
The next, though distant, Menelaus succeeds; 
While thus young Nestor animates his steeds: 
a_oeNow, now, my generous pair, exert your force; 
Not that we hope to match Tydidesa__ horse, 
Since great Minerva wings their rapid way, 
And gives their lord the honours of the day; 
But reach Atrides! shall his mare outgo 
Your swiftness? vanquisha__d by a female foe? 
Through your neglect, if lagging on the plain 
The last ignoble gift be all we gain, 
No more shall Nestora__s hand your food supply, 
The old mana__s fury rises, and ye die. 
Haste then: yon narrow road, before our sight, 
Presents the occasion, could we use it right.a__ 
Thus he. The coursers at their mastera__s threat 
With quicker steps the sounding champaign beat. 
And now Antilochus with nice survey 
Observes the compass of the hollow way. 
a__Twas where, by force of wintry torrents torn, 
Fast by the road a precipice was worn: 
Here, where but one could pass, to shun the throng 
The Spartan heroa__s chariot smoked along. 
Close up the venturous youth resolves to keep, 
Still edging near, and bears him toward the steep. 
Atrides, trembling, casts his eye below, 
And wonders at the rashness of his foe. 
a_oeHold, stay your steedsa_"What madness thus to ride 
This narrow way! take larger field (he cried), 
Or both must fall.a__a_"Atrides cried in vain; 
He flies more fast, and throws up all the rein. 
Far as an able arm the disk can send, 
[pg 417] 
When youthful rivals their full force extend, 
So far, Antilochus! thy chariot flew 
Before the king: he, cautious, backward drew 
His horse compella__d; foreboding in his fears 
The rattling ruin of the clashing cars, 
The floundering coursers rolling on the plain, 
And conquest lost through frantic haste to gain. 
But thus upbraids his rival as he flies: 
a_oeGo, furious youth! ungenerous and unwise! 
Go, but expect not Ia__ll the prize resign; 
Add perjury to fraud, and make it thinea_"a__ 
Then to his steeds with all his force he cries, 
a_oeBe swift, be vigorous, and regain the prize! 
Your rivals, destitute of youthful force, 
With fainting knees shall labour in the course, 
And yield the glory yours.a__a_"The steeds obey; 
Already at their heels they wing their way, 
And seem already to retrieve the day. 
Meantime the Grecians in a ring beheld 
The coursers bounding oa__er the dusty field. 
The first who marka__d them was the Cretan king; 
High on a rising ground, above the ring, 
The monarch sat: from whence with sure survey 
He well observed the chief who led the way, 
And heard from far his animating cries, 
And saw the foremost steed with sharpena__d eyes; 
On whose broad front a blaze of shining white, 
Like the full moon, stood obvious to the sight. 
He saw; and rising, to the Greeks begun: 
a_oeAre yonder horse discerna__d by me alone? 
Or can ye, all, another chief survey, 
And other steeds than lately led the way? 
Those, though the swiftest, by some god withheld, 
Lie sure disabled in the middle field: 
For, since the goal they doubled, round the plain 
I search to find them, but I search in vain. 
Perchance the reins forsook the drivera__s hand, 
And, turna__d too short, he tumbled on the strand, 
Shot from the chariot; while his coursers stray 
With frantic fury from the destined way. 
Rise then some other, and inform my sight, 
For these dim eyes, perhaps, discern not right; 
Yet sure he seems, to judge by shape and air, 
The great A_tolian chief, renowna__d in war.a__ 
a_oeOld man! (Oileus rashly thus replies) 
Thy tongue too hastily confers the prize; 
Of those who view the course, nor sharpest eyed, 
Nor youngest, yet the readiest to decide. 
Eumelusa__ steeds, high bounding in the chase, 
Still, as at first, unrivalla__d lead the race: 
[pg 418] 
I well discern him, as he shakes the rein, 
And hear his shouts victorious oa__er the plain.a__ 
Thus he. Idomeneus, incensed, rejoina__d: 
a_oeBarbarous of words! and arrogant of mind! 
Contentious prince, of all the Greeks beside 
The last in merit, as the first in pride! 
To vile reproach what answer can we make? 
A goblet or a tripod let us stake, 
And be the king the judge. The most unwise 
Will learn their rashness, when they pay the price.a__ 
He said: and Ajax, by mad passion borne, 
Stern had replied; fierce scorn enhancing scorn 
To fell extremes. But Thetisa__ godlike son 
Awful amidst them rose, and thus begun: 
a_oeForbear, ye chiefs! reproachful to contend; 
Much would ye blame, should others thus offend: 
And lo! the approaching steeds your contest end.a__ 
No sooner had he spoke, but thundering near, 
Drives, through a stream of dust, the charioteer. 
High oa__er his head the circling lash he wields: 
His bounding horses scarcely touch the fields: 
His car amidst the dusty whirlwind rolla__d, 
Bright with the mingled blaze of tin and gold, 
Refulgent through the cloud: no eye could find 
The track his flying wheels had left behind: 
And the fierce coursers urged their rapid pace 
So swift, it seema__d a flight, and not a race. 
Now victor at the goal Tydides stands, 
Quits his bright car, and springs upon the sands; 
From the hot steeds the sweaty torrents stream; 
The well-plied whip is hung athwart the beam: 
With joy brave Sthenelus receives the prize, 
The tripod-vase, and dame with radiant eyes: 
These to the ships his train triumphant leads, 
The chief himself unyokes the panting steeds. 
Young Nestor follows (who by art, not force, 
Oa__erpassa__d Atrides) second in the course. 
Behind, Atrides urged the race, more near 
Than to the courser in his swift career 
The following car, just touching with his heel 
And brushing with his tail the whirling wheel: 
Such, and so narrow now the space between 
The rivals, late so distant on the green; 
So soon swift A_the her lost ground regaina__d, 
One length, one moment, had the race obtaina__d. 
Merion pursued, at greater distance still, 
With tardier coursers, and inferior skill. 
Last came, Admetus! thy unhappy son; 
Slow dragged the steeds his battera__d chariot on: 
Achilles saw, and pitying thus begun: 
[pg 419] 
a_oeBehold! the man whose matchless art surpassa__d 
The sons of Greece! the ablest, yet the last! 
Fortune denies, but justice bids us pay 
(Since great Tydides bears the first away) 
To him the second honours of the day.a__ 
The Greeks consent with loud-applauding cries, 
And then Eumelus had received the prize, 
But youthful Nestor, jealous of his fame, 
The award opposes, and asserts his claim. 
a_oeThink not (he cries) I tamely will resign, 
O Peleusa__ son! the mare so justly mine. 
What if the gods, the skilful to confound, 
Have thrown the horse and horseman to the ground? 
Perhaps he sought not heaven by sacrifice, 
And vows omitted forfeited the prize. 
If yet (distinction to thy friend to show, 
And please a soul desirous to bestow) 
Some gift must grace Eumelus, view thy store 
Of beauteous handmaids, steeds, and shining ore; 
An ample present let him thence receive, 
And Greece shall praise thy generous thirst to give. 
But this my prize I never shall forego; 
This, who but touches, warriors! is my foe.a__ 
Thus spake the youth; nor did his words offend; 
Pleased with the well-turna__d flattery of a friend, 
Achilles smiled: a_oeThe gift proposed (he cried), 
Antilochus! we shall ourself provide. 
With plates of brass the corslet covera__d oa__er, 
(The same renowna__d Asteropaeus wore,) 
Whose glittering margins raised with silver shine, 
(No vulgar gift,) Eumelus! shall be thine.a__ 
He said: Automedon at his command 
The corslet brought, and gave it to his hand. 
Distinguisha__d by his friend, his bosom glows 
With generous joy: then Menelaus rose; 
The herald placed the sceptre in his hands, 
And stilla__d the clamour of the shouting bands. 
Not without cause incensed at Nestora__s son, 
And inly grieving, thus the king begun: 
a_oeThe praise of wisdom, in thy youth obtaina__d, 
An act so rash, Antilochus! has staina__d. 
Robba__d of my glory and my just reward, 
To you, O Grecians! be my wrong declared: 
So not a leader shall our conduct blame, 
Or judge me envious of a rivala__s fame. 
But shall not we, ourselves, the truth maintain? 
What needs appealing in a fact so plain? 
What Greek shall blame me, if I bid thee rise, 
And vindicate by oath tha__ ill-gotten prize? 
Rise if thou darest, before thy chariot stand, 
[pg 420] 
The driving scourge high-lifted in thy hand; 
And touch thy steeds, and swear thy whole intent 
Was but to conquer, not to circumvent. 
Swear by that god whose liquid arms surround 
The globe, and whose dread earthquakes heave the ground!a__ 
The prudent chief with calm attention heard; 
Then mildly thus: a_oeExcuse, if youth have erra__d; 
Superior as thou art, forgive the offence, 
Nor I thy equal, or in years, or sense. 
Thou knowa__st the errors of unripena__d age, 
Weak are its counsels, headlong is its rage. 
The prize I quit, if thou thy wrath resign; 
The mare, or aught thou aska__st, be freely thine 
Ere I become (from thy dear friendship torn) 
Hateful to thee, and to the gods forsworn.a__ 
So spoke Antilochus; and at the word 
The mare contested to the king restored. 
Joy swells his soul: as when the vernal grain 
Lifts the green ear above the springing plain, 
The fields their vegetable life renew, 
And laugh and glitter with the morning dew; 
Such joy the Spartana__s shining face oa__erspread, 
And lifted his gay heart, while thus he said: 
a_oeStill may our souls, O generous youth! agree 
a__Tis now Atridesa__ turn to yield to thee. 
Rash heat perhaps a moment might control, 
Not break, the settled temper of thy soul. 
Not but (my friend) a__tis still the wiser way 
To waive contention with superior sway; 
For ah! how few, who should like thee offend, 
Like thee, have talents to regain the friend! 
To plead indulgence, and thy fault atone, 
Suffice thy fathera__s merit and thy own: 
Generous alike, for me, the sire and son 
Have greatly suffera__d, and have greatly done. 
I yield; that all may know, my soul can bend, 
Nor is my pride preferra__d before my friend.a__ 
He said; and pleased his passion to command, 
Resigna__d the courser to Noemona__s hand, 
Friend of the youthful chief: himself content, 
The shining charger to his vessel sent. 
The golden talents Merion next obtaina__d; 
The fifth reward, the double bowl, remaina__d. 
Achilles this to reverend Nestor bears. 
And thus the purpose of his gift declares: 
a_oeAccept thou this, O sacred sire! (he said) 
In dear memorial of Patroclus dead; 
Dead and for ever lost Patroclus lies, 
For ever snatcha__d from our desiring eyes! 
Take thou this token of a grateful heart, 
[pg 421] 
Though a__tis not thine to hurl the distant dart, 
The quoit to toss, the ponderous mace to wield, 
Or urge the race, or wrestle on the field: 
Thy pristine vigour age has overthrown, 
But left the glory of the past thy own.a__ 
He said, and placed the goblet at his side; 
With joy the venerable king replied: 
a_oeWisely and well, my son, thy words have proved 
A senior honoura__d, and a friend beloved! 
Too true it is, deserted of my strength, 
These withera__d arms and limbs have faila__d at length. 
Oh! had I now that force I felt of yore, 
Known through Buprasium and the Pylian shore! 
Victorious then in every solemn game, 
Ordaina__d to Amaryncesa__ mighty name; 
The brave Epeians gave my glory way, 
A_tolians, Pylians, all resigna__d the day. 
I quella__d Clytomedes in fights of hand, 
And backward hurla__d Ancaeus on the sand, 
Surpassa__d Iphyclus in the swift career, 
Phyleus and Polydorus with the spear. 
The sons of Actor won the prize of horse, 
But won by numbers, not by art or force: 
For the famed twins, impatient to survey 
Prize after prize by Nestor borne away, 
Sprung to their car; and with united pains 
One lasha__d the coursers, while one ruled the reins. 
Such once I was! Now to these tasks succeeds 
A younger race, that emulate our deeds: 
I yield, alas! (to age who must not yield?) 
Though once the foremost hero of the field. 
Go thou, my son! by generous friendship led, 
With martial honours decorate the dead: 
While pleased I take the gift thy hands present, 
(Pledge of benevolence, and kind intent,) 
Rejoiced, of all the numerous Greeks, to see 
Not one but honours sacred age and me: 
Those due distinctions thou so well canst pay, 
May the just gods return another day!a__ 
Proud of the gift, thus spake the full of days: 
Achilles heard him, prouder of the praise. 
The prizes next are ordera__d to the field, 
For the bold champions who the caestus wield. 
A stately mule, as yet by toils unbroke, 
Of six yearsa__ age, unconscious of the yoke, 
Is to the circus led, and firmly bound; 
Next stands a goblet, massy, large, and round. 
Achilles rising, thus: a_oeLet Greece excite 
Two heroes equal to this hardy fight; 
Who dare the foe with lifted arms provoke, 
[pg 422] 
And rush beneath the long-descending stroke. 
On whom Apollo shall the palm bestow, 
And whom the Greeks supreme by conquest know, 
This mule his dauntless labours shall repay, 
The vanquisha__d bear the massy bowl away.a__ 
This dreadful combat great Epeus chose;291 
High oa__er the crowd, enormous bulk! he rose, 
And seized the beast, and thus began to say: 
a_oeStand forth some man, to bear the bowl away! 
(Price of his ruin: for who dares deny 
This mule my right; the undoubted victor I) 
Others, a__tis owna__d, in fields of battle shine, 
But the first honours of this fight are mine; 
For who excels in all? Then let my foe 
Draw near, but first his certain fortune know; 
Secure this hand shall his whole frame confound, 
Mash all his bones, and all his body pound: 
So let his friends be nigh, a needful train, 
To heave the battera__d carcase off the plain.a__ 
The giant spoke; and in a stupid gaze 
The host beheld him, silent with amaze! 
a__Twas thou, Euryalus! who durst aspire 
To meet his might, and emulate thy sire, 
The great Mecistheus; who in days of yore 
In Theban games the noblest trophy bore, 
(The games ordaina__d dead OEdipus to grace,) 
And singly vanquish the Cadmean race. 
Him great Tydides urges to contend, 
Warm with the hopes of conquest for his friend; 
Officious with the cincture girds him round; 
And to his wrist the gloves of death are bound. 
Amid the circle now each champion stands, 
And poises high in air his iron hands; 
With clashing gauntlets now they fiercely close, 
[pg 423] 
Their crackling jaws re-echo to the blows, 
And painful sweat from all their members flows. 
At length Epeus dealt a weighty blow 
Full on the cheek of his unwary foe; 
Beneath that ponderous arma__s resistless sway 
Down droppa__d he, nerveless, and extended lay. 
As a large fish, when winds and waters roar, 
By some huge billow dasha__d against the shore, 
Lies panting; not less battera__d with his wound, 
The bleeding hero pants upon the ground. 
To rear his fallen foe, the victor lends, 
Scornful, his hand; and gives him to his friends; 
Whose arms support him, reeling through the throng, 
And dragging his disabled legs along; 
Nodding, his head hangs down his shoulder oa__er; 
His mouth and nostrils pour the clotted gore;292 
Wrappa__d round in mists he lies, and lost to thought; 
His friends receive the bowl, too dearly bought. 
The third bold game Achilles next demands, 
And calls the wrestlers to the level sands: 
A massy tripod for the victor lies, 
Of twice six oxen its reputed price; 
And next, the losera__s spirits to restore, 
A female captive, valued but at four. 
Scarce did the chief the vigorous strife prop 
When tower-like Ajax and Ulysses rose. 
Amid the ring each nervous rival stands, 
Embracing rigid with implicit hands. 
Close locka__d above, their heads and arms are mixa__d: 
Below, their planted feet at distance fixa__d; 
Like two strong rafters which the builder forms, 
Proof to the wintry winds and howling storms, 
Their tops connected, but at wider space 
Fixa__d on the centre stands their solid base. 
Now to the grasp each manly body bends; 
The humid sweat from every pore descends; 
Their bones resound with blows: sides, shoulders, thighs 
Swell to each gripe, and bloody tumours rise. 
Nor could Ulysses, for his art renowna__d, 
Oa__erturn the strength of Ajax on the ground; 
Nor could the strength of Ajax overthrow 
The watchful caution of his artful foe. 
While the long strife even tired the lookers on, 
Thus to Ulysses spoke great Telamon: 
a_oeOr let me lift thee, chief, or lift thou me: 
Prove we our force, and Jove the rest decree.a__ 
[pg 424] 
He said; and, straining, heaved him off the ground 
With matchless strength; that time Ulysses found 
The strength to evade, and where the nerves combine 
His ankle struck: the giant fell supine; 
Ulysses, following, on his bosom lies; 
Shouts of applause run rattling through the skies. 
Ajax to lift Ulysses next essays; 
He barely stirra__d him, but he could not raise: 
His knee locka__d fast, the foea__s attempt denied; 
And grappling close, they tumbled side by side. 
Defiled with honourable dust they roll, 
Still breathing strife, and unsubdued of soul: 
Again they rage, again to combat rise; 
When great Achilles thus divides the prize: 
a_oeYour noble vigour, O my friends, restrain; 
Nor weary out your generous strength in vain. 
Ye both have won: let others who excel, 
Now prove that prowess you have proved so well.a__ 
The heroa__s words the willing chiefs obey, 
From their tired bodies wipe the dust away, 
And, clothed anew, the following games survey. 
And now succeed the gifts ordaina__d to grace 
The youths contending in the rapid race: 
A silver urn that full six measures held, 
By none in weight or workmanship excella__d: 
Sidonian artists taught the frame to shine, 
Elaborate, with artifice divine; 
Whence Tyrian sailors did the prize transport, 
And gave to Thoas at the Lemnian port: 
From him descended, good Eunaeus heira__d 
The glorious gift; and, for Lycaon spared, 
To brave Patroclus gave the rich reward: 
Now, the same heroa__s funeral rites to grace, 
It stands the prize of swiftness in the race. 
A well-fed ox was for the second placed; 
And half a talent must content the last. 
Achilles rising then bespoke the train: 
a_oeWho hope the palm of swiftness to obtain, 
Stand forth, and bear these prizes from the plain.a__ 
The hero said, and starting from his place, 
Oilean Ajax rises to the race; 
Ulysses next; and he whose speed surpassa__d 
His youthful equals, Nestora__s son, the last. 
Ranged in a line the ready racers stand; 
Pelides points the barrier with his hand; 
All start at once; Oileus led the race; 
The next Ulysses, measuring pace with pace; 
Behind him, diligently close, he sped, 
As closely following as the running thread 
The spindle follows, and displays the charms 
[pg 425] 
Of the fair spinstera__s breast and moving arms: 
Graceful in motion thus, his foe he plies, 
And treads each footstep ere the dust can rise; 
His glowing breath upon his shoulders plays: 
The admiring Greeks loud acclamations raise: 
To him they give their wishes, hearts, and eyes, 
And send their souls before him as he flies. 
Now three times turna__d in prospect of the goal, 
The panting chief to Pallas lifts his soul: 
a_oeAssist, O goddess!a__ thus in thought he praya__d! 
And present at his thought descends the maid. 
Buoya__d by her heavenly force, he seems to swim, 
And feels a pinion lifting every limb. 
All fierce, and ready now the prize to gain, 
Unhappy Ajax stumbles on the plain 
(Oa__erturna__d by Pallas), where the slippery shore 
Was clogga__d with slimy dung and mingled gore. 
(The self-same place beside Patroclusa__ pyre, 
Where late the slaughtera__d victims fed the fire.) 
Besmeara__d with filth, and blotted oa__er with clay, 
Obscene to sight, the rueful racer lay; 
The well-fed bull (the second prize) he shared, 
And left the urn Ulyssesa__ rich reward. 
Then, grasping by the horn the mighty beast, 
The baffled hero thus the Greeks addressa__d: 
a_oeAccursed fate! the conquest I forego; 
A mortal I, a goddess was my foe; 
She urged her favourite on the rapid way, 
And Pallas, not Ulysses, won the day.a__ 
Thus sourly waila__d he, sputtering dirt and gore; 
A burst of laughter echoed through the shore. 
Antilochus, more humorous than the rest, 
Takes the last prize, and takes it with a jest: 
a_oeWhy with our wiser elders should we strive? 
The gods still love them, and they always thrive. 
Ye see, to Ajax I must yield the prize: 
He to Ulysses, still more aged and wise; 
(A green old age unconscious of decays, 
That proves the hero born in better days!) 
Behold his vigour in this active race! 
Achilles only boasts a swifter pace: 
For who can match Achilles? He who can, 
Must yet be more than hero, more than man.a__ 
The effect succeeds the speech. Pelides cries, 
a_oeThy artful praise deserves a better prize. 
Nor Greece in vain shall hear thy friend extolla__d; 
Receive a talent of the purest gold.a__ 
The youth departs content. The host admire 
The son of Nestor, worthy of his sire. 
Next these a buckler, spear, and helm, he brings; 
[pg 426] 
Cast on the plain, the brazen burden rings: 
Arms which of late divine Sarpedon wore, 
And great Patroclus in short triumph bore. 
a_oeStand forth the bravest of our host! (he cries) 
Whoever dares deserve so rich a prize, 
Now grace the lists before our armya__s sight, 
And sheathed in steel, provoke his foe to fight. 
Who first the jointed armour shall explore, 
And stain his rivala__s mail with issuing gore, 
The sword Asteropaeus possessa__d of old, 
(A Thracian blade, distinct with studs of gold,) 
Shall pay the stroke, and grace the strikera__s side: 
These arms in common let the chiefs divide: 
For each brave champion, when the combat ends, 
A sumptuous banquet at our tents attends.a__ 
Fierce at the word uprose great Tydeusa__ son, 
And the huge bulk of Ajax Telamon. 
Clad in refulgent steel, on either hand, 
The dreadful chiefs amid the circle stand; 
Louring they meet, tremendous to the sight; 
Each Argive bosom beats with fierce delight. 
Opposed in arms not long they idly stood, 
But thrice they closed, and thrice the charge renewa__d. 
A furious pass the spear of Ajax made 
Through the broad shield, but at the corslet staya__d. 
Not thus the foe: his javelin aima__d above 
The bucklera__s margin, at the neck he drove. 
But Greece, now trembling for her heroa__s life, 
Bade share the honours, and surcease the strife. 
Yet still the victora__s due Tydides gains, 
With him the sword and studded belt remains. 
Then hurla__d the hero, thundering on the ground, 
A mass of iron (an enormous round), 
Whose weight and size the circling Greeks admire, 
Rude from the furnace, and but shaped by fire. 
This mighty quoit Aetion wont to rear, 
And from his whirling arm dismiss in air; 
The giant by Achilles slain, he stowa__d 
Among his spoils this memorable load. 
For this, he bids those nervous artists vie, 
That teach the disk to sound along the sky. 
a_oeLet him, whose might can hurl this bowl, arise; 
Who farthest hurls it, take it as his prize; 
If he be one enricha__d with large domain 
Of downs for flocks, and arable for grain, 
Small stock of iron needs that man provide; 
His hinds and swains whole years shall be supplied 
From hence; nor ask the neighbouring citya__s aid 
For ploughshares, wheels, and all the rural trade.a__ 
Stern Polypoetes steppa__d before the throng, 
[pg 427] 
And great Leonteus, more than mortal strong; 
Whose force with rival forces to oppose, 
Uprose great Ajax; up Epeus rose. 
Each stood in order: first Epeus threw; 
High oa__er the wondering crowds the whirling circle flew. 
Leonteus next a little space surpassa__d; 
And third, the strength of godlike Ajax cast. 
Oa__er both their marks it flew; till fiercely flung 
From Polypoetesa__ arm the discus sung: 
Far as a swain his whirling sheephook throws, 
That distant falls among the grazing cows, 
So past them all the rapid circle flies: 
His friends, while loud applauses shake the skies, 
With force conjoina__d heave off the weighty prize. 
Those, who in skilful archery contend, 
He next invites the twanging bow to bend; 
And twice ten axes casts amidst the round, 
Ten double-edged, and ten that singly wound 
The mast, which late a first-rate galley bore, 
The hero fixes in the sandy shore; 
To the tall top a milk-white dove they tie, 
The trembling mark at which their arrows fly. 
a_oeWhose weapon strikes yon fluttering bird, shall bear 
These two-edged axes, terrible in war; 
The single, he whose shaft divides the cord.a__ 
He said: experienced Merion took the word; 
And skilful Teucer: in the helm they threw 
Their lots inscribed, and forth the latter flew. 
Swift from the string the sounding arrow flies; 
But flies unblessa__d! No grateful sacrifice, 
No firstling lambs, unheedful! didst thou vow 
To Phoebus, patron of the shaft and bow. 
For this, thy well-aima__d arrow turna__d aside, 
Erra__d from the dove, yet cut the cord that tied: 
Adown the mainmast fell the parted string, 
And the free bird to heaven displays her wing: 
Sea, shores, and skies, with loud applause resound, 
And Merion eager meditates the wound: 
He takes the bow, directs the shaft above, 
And following with his eye the soaring dove, 
Implores the god to speed it through the skies, 
With vows of firstling lambs, and grateful sacrific 
The dove, in airy circles as she wheels, 
Amid the clouds the piercing arrow feels; 
Quite through and through the point its passage found, 
And at his feet fell bloody to the ground. 
The wounded bird, ere yet she breathed her last, 
With flagging wings alighted on the mast, 
A moment hung, and spread her pinions there, 
Then sudden droppa__d, and left her life in air. 
[pg 428] 
From the pleased crowd new peals of thunder rise, 
And to the ships brave Merion bears the prize. 
To close the funeral games, Achilles last 
A massy spear amid the circle placed, 
And ample charger of unsullied frame, 
With flowers high-wrought, not blackena__d yet by flame. 
For these he bids the heroes prove their art, 
Whose dexterous skill directs the flying dart. 
Here too great Merion hopes the noble prize; 
Nor here disdaina__d the king of men to rise. 
With joy Pelides saw the honour paid, 
Rose to the monarch, and respectful said: 
a_oeThee first in virtue, as in power supreme, 
O king of nations! all thy Greeks proclaim; 
In every martial game thy worth attest, 
And know thee both their greatest and their best. 
Take then the prize, but let brave Merion bear 
This beamy javelin in thy brothera__s war.a__ 
Pleased from the heroa__s lips his praise to hear, 
The king to Merion gives the brazen spear: 
But, set apart for sacred use, commands 
The glittering charger to Talthybiusa__ hands. 
Illustration: CERES. 
CERES. 
[pg 429] 
BOOK XXIV. 
ARGUMENT. 
THE REDEMPTION OF THE BODY OF HECTOR. 
The gods deliberate about the redemption of Hectora__s body. Jupiter 
sends Thetis to Achilles, to dispose him for the restoring it, and Iris 
to Priam, to encourage him to go in person and treat for it. The old 
king, notwithstanding the remonstrances of his queen, makes ready for 
the journey, to which he is encouraged by an omen from Jupiter. He sets 
forth in his chariot, with a waggon loaded with presents, under the 
charge of Idaeus the herald. Mercury descends in the shape of a young 
man, and conducts him to the pavilion of Achilles. Their conversation 
on the way. Priam finds Achilles at his table, casts himself at his 
feet, and begs for the body of his son: Achilles, moved with 
compassion, grants his request, detains him one night in his tent, and 
the next morning sends him home with the body: the Trojans run out to 
meet him. The lamentations of Andromache, Hecuba, and Helen, with the 
solemnities of the funeral. 
The time of twelve days is employed in this book, while the body of 
Hector lies in the tent of Achilles; and as many more are spent in the 
truce allowed for his interment. The scene is partly in Achillesa__ camp, 
and partly in Troy. 
Now from the finisha__d games the Grecian band 
Seek their black ships, and clear the crowded strand, 
All stretcha__d at ease the genial banquet share, 
And pleasing slumbers quiet all their care. 
Not so Achilles: he, to grief resigna__d, 
His frienda__s dear image present to his mind, 
Takes his sad couch, more unobserved to weep; 
Nor tastes the gifts of all-composing sleep. 
Restless he rolla__d around his weary bed, 
And all his soul on his Patroclus fed: 
The form so pleasing, and the heart so kind, 
That youthful vigour, and that manly mind, 
What toils they shared, what martial works they wrought, 
What seas they measured, and what fields they fought; 
All passa__d before him in remembrance dear, 
Thought follows thought, and tear succeeds to tear. 
And now supine, now prone, the hero lay, 
Now shifts his side, impatient for the day: 
[pg 430] 
Then starting up, disconsolate he goes 
Wide on the lonely beach to vent his woes. 
There as the solitary mourner raves, 
The ruddy morning rises oa__er the waves: 
Soon as it rose, his furious steeds he joina__d! 
The chariot flies, and Hector trails behind. 
And thrice, Patroclus! round thy monument 
Was Hector dragga__d, then hurried to the tent. 
There sleep at last oa__ercomes the heroa__s eyes; 
While foul in dust the unhonoura__d carcase lies, 
But not deserted by the pitying skies: 
For Phoebus watcha__d it with superior care, 
Preserved from gaping wounds and tainting air; 
And, ignominious as it swept the field, 
Spread oa__er the sacred corse his golden shield. 
All heaven was moved, and Hermes willa__d to go 
By stealth to snatch him from the insulting foe: 
But Neptune this, and Pallas this denies, 
And tha__ unrelenting empress of the skies, 
Ea__er since that day implacable to Troy, 
What time young Paris, simple shepherd boy, 
Won by destructive lust (reward obscene), 
Their charms rejected for the Cyprian queen. 
But when the tenth celestial morning broke, 
To heaven assembled, thus Apollo spoke: 
Illustration: HECTOR'S BODY AT THE CAR OF ACHILLES. 
HECTORa__S BODY AT THE CAR OF ACHILLES. 
a_oeUnpitying powers! how oft each holy fane 
Has Hector tinged with blood of victims slain? 
And can ye still his cold remains pursue? 
Still grudge his body to the Trojansa__ view? 
Deny to consort, mother, son, and sire, 
The last sad honours of a funeral fire? 
Is then the dire Achilles all your care? 
[pg 431] 
That iron heart, inflexibly severe; 
A lion, not a man, who slaughters wide, 
In strength of rage, and impotence of pride; 
Who hastes to murder with a savage joy, 
Invades around, and breathes but to destroy! 
Shame is not of his soul; nor understood, 
The greatest evil and the greatest good. 
Still for one loss he rages unresigna__d, 
Repugnant to the lot of all mankind; 
To lose a friend, a brother, or a son, 
Heaven dooms each mortal, and its will is done: 
Awhile they sorrow, then dismiss their care; 
Fate gives the wound, and man is born to bear. 
But this insatiate, the commission given 
By fate exceeds, and tempts the wrath of heaven: 
Lo, how his rage dishonest drags along 
Hectora__s dead earth, insensible of wrong! 
Brave though he be, yet by no reason awed, 
He violates the laws of man and god.a__ 
Illustration: THE JUDGMENT OF PARIS. 
THE JUDGMENT OF PARIS. 
a_oeIf equal honours by the partial skies 
Are dooma__d both heroes, (Juno thus replies,) 
If Thetisa__ son must no distinction know, 
Then hear, ye gods! the patron of the bow. 
But Hector only boasts a mortal claim, 
His birth deriving from a mortal dame: 
Achilles, of your own ethereal race, 
Springs from a goddess by a mana__s embrace 
(A goddess by ourself to Peleus given, 
A man divine, and chosen friend of heaven) 
[pg 432] 
To grace those nuptials, from the bright abode 
Yourselves were present; where this minstrel-god, 
Well pleased to share the feast, amid the quire 
Stood proud to hymn, and tune his youthful lyre.a__ 
Then thus the Thunderer checks the imperial dame: 
a_oeLet not thy wrath the court of heaven inflame; 
Their merits, nor their honours, are the same. 
But mine, and every goda__s peculiar grace 
Hector deserves, of all the Trojan race: 
Still on our shrines his grateful offerings lay, 
(The only honours men to gods can pay,) 
Nor ever from our smoking altar ceased 
The pure libation, and the holy feast: 
Howea__er by stealth to snatch the corse away, 
We will not: Thetis guards it night and day. 
But haste, and summon to our courts above 
The azure queen; let her persuasion move 
Her furious son from Priam to receive 
The proffera__d ransom, and the corse to leave.a__ 
He added not: and Iris from the skies, 
Swift as a whirlwind, on the message flies, 
Meteorous the face of ocean sweeps, 
Refulgent gliding oa__er the sable deeps. 
Between where Samos wide his forests spreads, 
And rocky Imbrus lifts its pointed heads, 
Down plunged the maid; (the parted waves resound;) 
She plunged and instant shot the dark profound. 
As bearing death in the fallacious bait, 
From the bent angle sinks the leaden weight; 
So passa__d the goddess through the closing wave, 
Where Thetis sorrowa__d in her secret cave: 
There placed amidst her melancholy train 
(The blue-haira__d sisters of the sacred main) 
Pensive she sat, revolving fates to come, 
And wept her godlike sona__s approaching doom. 
Then thus the goddess of the painted bow: 
a_oeArise, O Thetis! from thy seats below, 
a__Tis Jove that calls.a__a_"a_oeAnd why (the dame replies) 
Calls Jove his Thetis to the hated skies? 
Sad object as I am for heavenly sight! 
Ah may my sorrows ever shun the light! 
Howea__er, be heavena__s almighty sire obeya__da_"a__ 
She spake, and veila__d her head in sable shade, 
Which, flowing long, her graceful person clad; 
And forth she paced, majestically sad. 
Then through the world of waters they repair 
(The way fair Iris led) to upper air. 
The deeps dividing, oa__er the coast they rise, 
And touch with momentary flight the skies. 
There in the lightninga__s blaze the sire they found, 
[pg 433] 
And all the gods in shining synod round. 
Thetis approacha__d with anguish in her face, 
(Minerva rising, gave the mourner place,) 
Even Juno sought her sorrows to console, 
And offera__d from her hand the nectar-bowl: 
She tasted, and resigna__d it: then began 
The sacred sire of gods and mortal man: 
a_oeThou comest, fair Thetis, but with grief oa__ercast; 
Maternal sorrows; long, ah, long to last! 
Suffice, we know and we partake thy cares; 
But yield to fate, and hear what Jove declares 
Nine days are past since all the court above 
In Hectora__s cause have moved the ear of Jove; 
a__Twas voted, Hermes from his godlike foe 
By stealth should bear him, but we willa__d not so: 
We will, thy son himself the corse restore, 
And to his conquest add this glory more. 
Then hie thee to him, and our mandate bear: 
Tell him he tempts the wrath of heaven too far; 
Nor let him more (our anger if he dread) 
Vent his mad vengeance on the sacred dead; 
But yield to ransom and the fathera__s prayer; 
The mournful father, Iris shall prepare 
With gifts to sue; and offer to his hands 
Whatea__er his honour asks, or heart demands.a__ 
His word the silver-footed queen attends, 
And from Olympusa__ snowy tops descends. 
Arrived, she heard the voice of loud lament, 
And echoing groans that shook the lofty tent: 
His friends prepare the victim, and dispose 
Repast unheeded, while he vents his woes; 
The goddess seats her by her pensive son, 
She pressa__d his hand, and tender thus begun: 
a_oeHow long, unhappy! shall thy sorrows flow, 
And thy heart waste with life-consuming woe: 
Mindless of food, or love, whose pleasing reign 
Soothes weary life, and softens human pain? 
O snatch the moments yet within thy power; 
Not long to live, indulge the amorous hour! 
Lo! Jove himself (for Jovea__s command I bear) 
Forbids to tempt the wrath of heaven too far. 
No longer then (his fury if thou dread) 
Detain the relics of great Hector dead; 
Nor vent on senseless earth thy vengeance vain, 
But yield to ransom, and restore the slain.a__ 
To whom Achilles: a_oeBe the ransom given, 
And we submit, since such the will of heaven.a__ 
While thus they communed, from the Olympian bowers 
Jove orders Iris to the Trojan towers: 
a_oeHaste, winged goddess! to the sacred town, 
[pg 434] 
And urge her monarch to redeem his son. 
Alone the Ilian ramparts let him leave, 
And bear what stern Achilles may receive: 
Alone, for so we will; no Trojan near 
Except, to place the dead with decent care, 
Some aged herald, who with gentle hand 
May the slow mules and funeral car command. 
Nor let him death, nor let him danger dread, 
Safe through the foe by our protection led: 
Him Hermes to Achilles shall convey, 
Guard of his life, and partner of his way. 
Fierce as he is, Achillesa__ self shall spare 
His age, nor touch one venerable hair: 
Some thought there must be in a soul so brave, 
Some sense of duty, some desire to save.a__ 
Illustration: IRIS ADVISES PRIAM TO OBTAIN THE BODY OF HECTOR. 
IRIS ADVISES PRIAM TO OBTAIN THE BODY OF HECTOR. 
Then down her bow the winged Iris drives, 
And swift at Priama__s mournful court arrives: 
Where the sad sons beside their fathera__s throne 
Sat bathed in tears, and answera__d groan with groan. 
And all amidst them lay the hoary sire, 
(Sad scene of woe!) his face his wrappa__d attire 
Conceala__d from sight; with frantic hands he spread 
A shower of ashes oa__er his neck and head. 
From room to room his pensive daughters roam; 
Whose shrieks and clamours fill the vaulted dome; 
Mindful of those, who late their pride and joy, 
Lie pale and breathless round the fields of Troy! 
Before the king Jovea__s messenger appears, 
And thus in whispers greets his trembling ears: 
a_oeFear not, O father! no ill news I bear; 
From Jove I come, Jove makes thee still his care; 
[pg 435] 
For Hectora__s sake these walls he bids thee leave, 
And bear what stern Achilles may receive; 
Alone, for so he wills; no Trojan near, 
Except, to place the dead with decent care, 
Some aged herald, who with gentle hand 
May the slow mules and funeral car command. 
Nor shalt thou death, nor shall thou danger dread: 
Safe through the foe by his protection led: 
Thee Hermes to Pelides shall convey, 
Guard of thy life, and partner of thy way. 
Fierce as he is, Achillesa__ self shall spare 
Thy age, nor touch one venerable hair; 
Some thought there must be in a soul so brave, 
Some sense of duty, some desire to save.a__ 
She spoke, and vanisha__d. Priam bids prepare 
His gentle mules and harness to the car; 
There, for the gifts, a polisha__d casket lay: 
His pious sons the kinga__s command obey. 
Then passa__d the monarch to his bridal-room, 
Where cedar-beams the lofty roofs perfume, 
And where the treasures of his empire lay; 
Then calla__d his queen, and thus began to say: 
a_oeUnhappy consort of a king distressa__d! 
Partake the troubles of thy husbanda__s breast: 
I saw descend the messenger of Jove, 
Who bids me try Achillesa__ mind to move; 
Forsake these ramparts, and with gifts obtain 
The corse of Hector, at yon navy slain. 
Tell me thy thought: my heart impels to go 
Through hostile camps, and bears me to the foe.a__ 
The hoary monarch thus. Her piercing cries 
Sad Hecuba renews, and then replies: 
a_oeAh! whither wanders thy distempera__d mind? 
And where the prudence now that awed mankind? 
Through Phrygia once and foreign regions known; 
Now all confused, distracted, overthrown! 
Singly to pass through hosts of foes! to face 
(O heart of steel!) the murderer of thy race! 
To view that deathful eye, and wander oa__er 
Those hands yet red with Hectora__s noble gore! 
Alas! my lord! he knows not how to spare. 
And what his mercy, thy slain sons declare; 
So brave! so many fallen! To claim his rage 
Vain were thy dignity, and vain thy age. 
Noa_"pent in this sad palace, let us give 
To grief the wretched days we have to live. 
Still, still for Hector let our sorrows flow, 
Born to his own, and to his parentsa__ woe! 
Dooma__d from the hour his luckless life begun, 
To dogs, to vultures, and to Peleusa__ son! 
[pg 436] 
Oh! in his dearest blood might I allay 
My rage, and these barbarities repay! 
For ah! could Hector merit thus, whose breath 
Expired not meanly, in unactive death? 
He poured his latest blood in manly fight, 
And fell a hero in his countrya__s right.a__ 
a_oeSeek not to stay me, nor my soul affright 
With words of omen, like a bird of night, 
(Replied unmoved the venerable man;) 
a__Tis heaven commands me, and you urge in vain. 
Had any mortal voice the injunction laid, 
Nor augur, priest, nor seer, had been obeya__d. 
A present goddess brought the high command, 
I saw, I heard her, and the word shall stand. 
I go, ye gods! obedient to your call: 
If in yon camp your powers have dooma__d my fall, 
Contenta_"By the same hand let me expire! 
Add to the slaughtera__d son the wretched sire! 
One cold embrace at least may be allowa__d, 
And my last tears flow mingled with his blood!a__ 
From forth his opena__d stores, this said, he drew 
Twelve costly carpets of refulgent hue, 
As many vests, as many mantles told, 
And twelve fair veils, and garments stiff with gold, 
Two tripods next, and twice two chargers shine, 
With ten pure talents from the richest mine; 
And last a large well-laboura__d bowl had place, 
(The pledge of treaties once with friendly Thrace:) 
Seema__d all too mean the stores he could employ, 
For one last look to buy him back to Troy! 
Lo! the sad father, frantic with his pain, 
Around him furious drives his menial train: 
In vain each slave with duteous care attends, 
Each office hurts him, and each face offends. 
a_oeWhat make ye here, officious crowds! (he cries). 
Hence! nor obtrude your anguish on my eyes. 
Have ye no griefs at home, to fix ye there: 
Am I the only object of despair? 
Am I become my peoplea__s common show, 
Set up by Jove your spectacle of woe? 
No, you must feel him too; yourselves must fall; 
The same stern god to ruin gives you all: 
Nor is great Hector lost by me alone; 
Your sole defence, your guardian power is gone! 
I see your blood the fields of Phrygia drown, 
I see the ruins of your smoking town! 
O send me, gods! ere that sad day shall come, 
A willing ghost to Plutoa__s dreary dome!a__ 
He said, and feebly drives his friends away: 
The sorrowing friends his frantic rage obey. 
[pg 437] 
Next on his sons his erring fury falls, 
Polites, Paris, Agathon, he calls; 
His threats Deiphobus and Dius hear, 
Hippothous, Pammon, Helenes the seer, 
And generous Antiphon: for yet these nine 
Survived, sad relics of his numerous line. 
a_oeInglorious sons of an unhappy sire! 
Why did not all in Hectora__s cause expire? 
Wretch that I am! my bravest offspring slain. 
You, the disgrace of Priama__s house, remain! 
Mestor the brave, renowna__d in ranks of war, 
With Troilus, dreadful on his rushing car,293 
And last great Hector, more than man divine, 
For sure he seema__d not of terrestrial line! 
All those relentless Mars untimely slew, 
And left me these, a soft and servile crew, 
Whose days the feast and wanton dance employ, 
Gluttons and flatterers, the contempt of Troy! 
Why teach ye not my rapid wheels to run, 
And speed my journey to redeem my son?a__ 
The sons their fathera__s wretched age revere, 
Forgive his anger, and produce the car. 
High on the seat the cabinet they bind: 
The new-made car with solid beauty shined; 
Box was the yoke, embossa__d with costly pains, 
And hung with ringlets to receive the reins; 
Nine cubits long, the traces swept the ground: 
These to the chariota__s polisha__d pole they bound. 
Then fixa__d a ring the running reins to guide, 
And close beneath the gathera__d ends were tied. 
Next with the gifts (the price of Hector slain) 
The sad attendants load the groaning wain: 
Last to the yoke the well-matched mules they bring, 
(The gift of Mysia to the Trojan king.) 
But the fair horses, long his darling care, 
Himself received, and harnessa__d to his car: 
Grieved as he was, he not this task denied; 
The hoary herald helpa__d him, at his side. 
While careful these the gentle coursers joina__d, 
Sad Hecuba approacha__d with anxious mind; 
A golden bowl that foama__d with fragrant wine, 
(Libation destined to the power divine,) 
Held in her right, before the steed she stands, 
And thus consigns it to the monarcha__s hands: 
a_oeTake this, and pour to Jove; that safe from harms 
His grace restore thee to our roof and arms. 
Since victor of thy fears, and slighting mine, 
[pg 438] 
Heaven, or thy soul, inspires this bold design; 
Pray to that god, who high on Idaa__s brow 
Surveys thy desolated realms below, 
His winged messenger to send from high, 
And lead thy way with heavenly augury: 
Let the strong sovereign of the plumy race 
Tower on the right of yon ethereal space. 
That sign beheld, and strengthena__d from above, 
Boldly pursue the journey marka__d by Jove: 
But if the god his augury denies, 
Suppress thy impulse, nor reject advice.a__ 
a_oea__Tis just (said Priam) to the sire above 
To raise our hands; for who so good as Jove?a__ 
He spoke, and bade the attendant handmaid bring 
The purest water of the living spring: 
(Her ready hands the ewer and bason held:) 
Then took the golden cup his queen had filla__d; 
On the mid pavement pours the rosy wine, 
Uplifts his eyes, and calls the power divine: 
a_oeO first and greatest! heavena__s imperial lord! 
On lofty Idaa__s holy hill adored! 
To stern Achilles now direct my ways, 
And teach him mercy when a father prays. 
If such thy will, despatch from yonder sky 
Thy sacred bird, celestial augury! 
Let the strong sovereign of the plumy race 
Tower on the right of yon ethereal space; 
So shall thy suppliant, strengthena__d from above, 
Fearless pursue the journey marka__d by Jove.a__ 
Jove heard his prayer, and from the throne on high, 
Despatcha__d his bird, celestial augury! 
The swift-winga__d chaser of the feathera__d game, 
And known to gods by Percnosa__ lofty name. 
Wide as appears some palace-gate displaya__d. 
So broad, his pinions stretcha__d their ample shade, 
As stooping dexter with resounding wings 
The imperial bird descends in airy rings. 
A dawn of joy in every face appears: 
The mourning matron dries her timorous tears: 
Swift on his car the impatient monarch sprung; 
The brazen portal in his passage rung; 
The mules preceding draw the loaded wain, 
Charged with the gifts: Idaeus holds the rein: 
The king himself his gentle steeds controls, 
And through surrounding friends the chariot rolls. 
On his slow wheels the following people wait, 
Mourn at each step, and give him up to fate; 
With hands uplifted eye him as he passa__d, 
And gaze upon him as they gazed their last. 
Now forward fares the father on his way, 
[pg 439] 
Through the lone fields, and back to Ilion they. 
Great Jove beheld him as he crossa__d the plain, 
And felt the woes of miserable man. 
Then thus to Hermes: a_oeThou whose constant cares 
Still succour mortals, and attend their prayers; 
Behold an object to thy charge consigna__d: 
If ever pity toucha__d thee for mankind, 
Go, guard the sire: the observing foe prevent, 
And safe conduct him to Achillesa__ tent.a__ 
The god obeys, his golden pinions binds,294 
And mounts incumbent on the wings of winds, 
That high, through fields of air, his flight sustain, 
Oa__er the wide earth, and oa__er the boundless main; 
Then grasps the wand that causes sleep to fly, 
Or in soft slumbers seals the wakeful eye: 
Thus arma__d, swift Hermes steers his airy way, 
And stoops on Hellesponta__s resounding sea. 
A beauteous youth, majestic and divine, 
He seema__d; fair offspring of some princely line! 
Now twilight veila__d the glaring face of day, 
And clad the dusky fields in sober grey; 
What time the herald and the hoary king 
(Their chariots stopping at the silver spring, 
That circling Ilusa__ ancient marble flows) 
Allowa__d their mules and steeds a short repose, 
Through the dim shade the herald first espies 
A mana__s approach, and thus to Priam cries: 
a_oeI mark some foea__s advance: O king! beware; 
This hard adventure claims thy utmost care! 
[pg 440] 
For much I fear destruction hovers nigh: 
Our state asks counsel; is it best to fly? 
Or old and helpless, at his feet to fall, 
Two wretched suppliants, and for mercy call?a__ 
The afflicted monarch shivera__d with despair; 
Pale grew his face, and upright stood his hair; 
Sunk was his heart; his colour went and came; 
A sudden trembling shook his aged frame: 
When Hermes, greeting, toucha__d his royal hand, 
And, gentle, thus accosts with kind demand: 
a_oeSay whither, father! when each mortal sight 
Is seala__d in sleep, thou wanderest through the night? 
Why roam thy mules and steeds the plains along, 
Through Grecian foes, so numerous and so strong? 
What couldst thou hope, should these thy treasures view; 
These, who with endless hate thy race pursue? 
For what defence, alas! coulda__st thou provide; 
Thyself not young, a weak old man thy guide? 
Yet suffer not thy soul to sink with dread; 
From me no harm shall touch thy reverend head; 
From Greece Ia__ll guard thee too; for in those lines 
The living image of my father shines.a__ 
a_oeThy words, that speak benevolence of mind, 
Are true, my son! (the godlike sire rejoina__d:) 
Great are my hazards; but the gods survey 
My steps, and send thee, guardian of my way. 
Hail, and be blessa__d! For scarce of mortal kind 
Appear thy form, thy feature, and thy mind.a__ 
a_oeNor true are all thy words, nor erring wide; 
(The sacred messenger of heaven replied;) 
But say, conveya__st thou through the lonely plains 
What yet most precious of thy store remains, 
To lodge in safety with some friendly hand: 
Prepared, perchance, to leave thy native land? 
Or fliest thou now?a_"What hopes can Troy retain, 
Thy matchless son, her guard and glory, slain?a__ 
The king, alarma__d: a_oeSay what, and whence thou art 
Who search the sorrows of a parenta__s heart, 
And know so well how godlike Hector died?a__ 
Thus Priam spoke, and Hermes thus replied: 
a_oeYou tempt me, father, and with pity touch: 
On this sad subject you inquire too much. 
Oft have these eyes that godlike Hector viewa__d 
In glorious fight, with Grecian blood embrued: 
I saw him when, like Jove, his flames he tossa__d 
On thousand ships, and withera__d half a host: 
I saw, but helpa__d not: stern Achillesa__ ire 
Forbade assistance, and enjoya__d the fire. 
For him I serve, of Myrmidonian race; 
One ship conveya__d us from our native place; 
[pg 441] 
Polyctor is my sire, an honoura__d name, 
Old like thyself, and not unknown to fame; 
Of seven his sons, by whom the lot was cast 
To serve our prince, it fell on me, the last. 
To watch this quarter, my adventure falls: 
For with the morn the Greeks attack your walls; 
Sleepless they sit, impatient to engage, 
And scarce their rulers check their martial rage.a__ 
a_oeIf then thou art of stern Pelidesa__ train, 
(The mournful monarch thus rejoina__d again,) 
Ah tell me truly, where, oh! where are laid 
My sona__s dear relics? what befals him dead? 
Have dogs dismembera__d (on the naked plains), 
Or yet unmangled rest, his cold remains?a__ 
a_oeO favoura__d of the skies! (thus answered then 
The power that mediates between god and men) 
Nor dogs nor vultures have thy Hector rent, 
But whole he lies, neglected in the tent: 
This the twelfth evening since he rested there, 
Untoucha__d by worms, untainted by the air. 
Still as Auroraa__s ruddy beam is spread, 
Round his frienda__s tomb Achilles drags the dead: 
Yet undisfigured, or in limb or face, 
All fresh he lies, with every living grace, 
Majestical in death! No stains are found 
Oa__er all the corse, and closed is every wound, 
Though many a wound they gave. Some heavenly care, 
Some hand divine, preserves him ever fair: 
Or all the host of heaven, to whom he led 
A life so grateful, still regard him dead.a__ 
Thus spoke to Priam the celestial guide, 
And joyful thus the royal sire replied: 
a_oeBlest is the man who pays the gods above 
The constant tribute of respect and love! 
Those who inhabit the Olympian bower 
My son forgot not, in exalted power; 
And heaven, that every virtue bears in mind, 
Even to the ashes of the just is kind. 
But thou, O generous youth! this goblet take, 
A pledge of gratitude for Hectora__s sake; 
And while the favouring gods our steps survey, 
Safe to Pelidesa__ tent conduct my way.a__ 
To whom the latent god: a_oeO king, forbear 
To tempt my youth, for apt is youth to err. 
But can I, absent from my princea__s sight, 
Take gifts in secret, that must shun the light? 
What from our mastera__s interest thus we draw, 
Is but a licensed theft that a__scapes the law. 
Respecting him, my soul abjures the offence; 
And as the crime, I dread the consequence. 
[pg 442] 
Thee, far as Argos, pleased I could convey; 
Guard of thy life, and partner of thy way: 
On thee attend, thy safety to maintain, 
Oa__er pathless forests, or the roaring main.a__ 
He said, then took the chariot at a bound, 
And snatcha__d the reins, and whirla__d the lash around: 
Before the inspiring god that urged them on, 
The coursers fly with spirit not their own. 
And now they reacha__d the naval walls, and found 
The guards repasting, while the bowls go round; 
On these the virtue of his wand he tries, 
And pours deep slumber on their watchful eyes: 
Then heaved the massy gates, removed the bars, 
And oa__er the trenches led the rolling cars. 
Unseen, through all the hostile camp they went, 
And now approacha__d Pelidesa__ lofty tent. 
On firs the roof was raised, and covera__d oa__er 
With reeds collected from the marshy shore; 
And, fenced with palisades, a hall of state, 
(The work of soldiers,) where the hero sat. 
Large was the door, whose well-compacted strength 
A solid pine-tree barra__d of wondrous length: 
Scarce three strong Greeks could lift its mighty weight, 
But great Achilles singly closed the gate. 
This Hermes (such the power of gods) set wide; 
Then swift alighted the celestial guide, 
And thus reveala__da_"a__Hear, prince! and understand 
Thou owa__st thy guidance to no mortal hand: 
Hermes I am, descended from above, 
The king of arts, the messenger of Jove, 
Farewell: to shun Achillesa__ sight I fly; 
Uncommon are such favours of the sky, 
Nor stand confessa__d to frail mortality. 
Now fearless enter, and prefer thy prayers; 
Adjure him by his fathera__s silver hairs, 
His son, his mother! urge him to bestow 
Whatever pity that stern heart can know.a__ 
Thus having said, he vanisha__d from his eyes, 
And in a moment shot into the skies: 
The king, confirma__d from heaven, alighted there, 
And left his aged herald on the car, 
With solemn pace through various rooms he went, 
And found Achilles in his inner tent: 
There sat the hero: Alcimus the brave, 
And great Automedon, attendance gave: 
These served his person at the royal feast; 
Around, at awful distance, stood the rest. 
Unseen by these, the king his entry made: 
And, prostrate now before Achilles laid, 
Sudden (a venerable sight!) appears; 
[pg 443] 
Embraced his knees, and bathed his hands in tears; 
Those direful hands his kisses pressa__d, embrued 
Even with the best, the dearest of his blood! 
As when a wretch (who, conscious of his crime, 
Pursued for murder, flies his native clime) 
Just gains some frontier, breathless, pale, amazed, 
All gaze, all wonder: thus Achilles gazed: 
Thus stood the attendants stupid with surprise: 
All mute, yet seema__d to question with their eyes: 
Each looka__d on other, none the silence broke, 
Till thus at last the kingly suppliant spoke: 
a_oeAh think, thou favoura__d of the powers divine!295 
Think of thy fathera__s age, and pity mine! 
In me that fathera__s reverend image trace, 
Those silver hairs, that venerable face; 
His trembling limbs, his helpless person, see! 
In all my equal, but in misery! 
Yet now, perhaps, some turn of human fate 
Expels him helpless from his peaceful state; 
Think, from some powerful foe thou seest him fly, 
And beg protection with a feeble cry. 
Yet still one comfort in his soul may rise; 
He hears his son still lives to glad his eyes, 
And, hearing, still may hope a better day 
May send him thee, to chase that foe away. 
No comfort to my griefs, no hopes remain, 
The best, the bravest, of my sons are slain! 
Yet what a race! ere Greece to Ilion came, 
The pledge of many a loved and loving dame: 
Nineteen one mother borea_"Dead, all are dead! 
How oft, alas! has wretched Priam bled! 
Still one was left their loss to recompense; 
His fathera__s hope, his countrya__s last defence. 
Him too thy rage has slain! beneath thy steel, 
Unhappy in his countrya__s cause he fell! 
[pg 444] 
a_oeFor him through hostile camps I bent my way, 
For him thus prostrate at thy feet I lay; 
Large gifts proportiona__d to thy wrath I bear; 
O hear the wretched, and the gods revere! 
a_oeThink of thy father, and this face behold! 
See him in me, as helpless and as old! 
Though not so wretched: there he yields to me, 
The first of men in sovereign misery! 
Thus forced to kneel, thus grovelling to embrace 
The scourge and ruin of my realm and race; 
Suppliant my childrena__s murderer to implore, 
And kiss those hands yet reeking with their gore!a__ 
These words soft pity in the chief inspire, 
Toucha__d with the dear remembrance of his sire. 
Then with his hand (as prostrate still he lay) 
The old mana__s cheek he gently turna__d away. 
Now each by turns indulged the gush of woe; 
And now the mingled tides together flow: 
This low on earth, that gently bending oa__er; 
A father one, and one a son deplore: 
But great Achilles different passions rend, 
And now his sire he mourns, and now his friend. 
The infectious softness through the heroes ran; 
One universal solemn shower began; 
They bore as heroes, but they felt as man. 
Satiate at length with unavailing woes, 
From the high throne divine Achilles rose; 
The reverend monarch by the hand he raised; 
On his white beard and form majestic gazed, 
Not unrelenting; then serene began 
With words to soothe the miserable man: 
a_oeAlas, what weight of anguish hast thou known, 
Unhappy prince! thus guardless and alone 
Two pass through foes, and thus undaunted face 
The man whose fury has destroya__d thy race! 
Heaven sure has arma__d thee with a heart of steel, 
A strength proportiona__d to the woes you feel. 
Rise, then: let reason mitigate your care: 
To mourn avails not: man is born to bear. 
Such is, alas! the godsa__ severe decree: 
They, only they are blest, and only free. 
Two urns by Jovea__s high throne have ever stood, 
The source of evil one, and one of good; 
From thence the cup of mortal man he fills, 
Blessings to these, to those distributes ill; 
To most he mingles both: the wretch decreed 
To taste the bad unmixa__d, is cursed indeed; 
Pursued by wrongs, by meagre famine driven, 
He wanders, outcast both of earth and heaven. 
The happiest taste not happiness sincere; 
[pg 445] 
But find the cordial draught is dasha__d with care. 
Who more than Peleus shone in wealth and power 
What stars concurring blessa__d his natal hour! 
A realm, a goddess, to his wishes given; 
Graced by the gods with all the gifts of heaven. 
One evil yet oa__ertakes his latest day: 
No race succeeding to imperial sway; 
An only son; and he, alas! ordaina__d 
To fall untimely in a foreign land. 
See him, in Troy, the pious care decline 
Of his weak age, to live the curse of thine! 
Thou too, old man, hast happier days beheld; 
In riches once, in children once excella__d; 
Extended Phrygia owna__d thy ample reign, 
And all fair Lesbosa__ blissful seats contain, 
And all wide Hellesponta__s unmeasured main. 
But since the god his hand has pleased to turn, 
And fill thy measure from his bitter urn, 
What sees the sun, but hapless heroesa__ falls? 
War, and the blood of men, surround thy walls! 
What must be, must be. Bear thy lot, nor shed 
These unavailing sorrows oa__er the dead; 
Thou canst not call him from the Stygian shore, 
But thou, alas! maya__st live to suffer more!a__ 
To whom the king: a_oeO favoura__d of the skies! 
Here let me grow to earth! since Hector lies 
On the bare beach deprived of obsequies. 
O give me Hector! to my eyes restore 
His corse, and take the gifts: I ask no more. 
Thou, as thou maya__st, these boundless stores enjoy; 
Safe maya__st thou sail, and turn thy wrath from Troy; 
So shall thy pity and forbearance give 
A weak old man to see the light and live!a__ 
a_oeMove me no more, (Achilles thus replies, 
While kindling anger sparkled in his eyes,) 
Nor seek by tears my steady soul to bend: 
To yield thy Hector I myself intend: 
For know, from Jove my goddess-mother came, 
(Old Oceana__s daughter, silver-footed dame,) 
Nor comest thou but by heaven; nor comest alone, 
Some god impels with courage not thy own: 
No human hand the weighty gates unbarra__d, 
Nor could the boldest of our youth have dared 
To pass our outworks, or elude the guard. 
Cease; lest, neglectful of high Jovea__s command, 
I show thee, king! thou treada__st on hostile land; 
Release my knees, thy suppliant arts give oa__er, 
And shake the purpose of my soul no more.a__ 
The sire obeya__d him, trembling and oa__erawa__d. 
Achilles, like a lion, rusha__d abroad: 
[pg 446] 
Automedon and Alcimus attend, 
(Whom most he honoura__d, since he lost his friend,) 
These to unyoke the mules and horses went, 
And led the hoary herald to the tent; 
Next, heapa__d on high, the numerous presents bear, 
(Great Hectora__s ransom,) from the polisha__d car. 
Two splendid mantles, and a carpet spread, 
They leave: to cover and enwrap the dead. 
Then call the handmaids, with assistant toil 
To wash the body and anoint with oil, 
Apart from Priam: lest the unhappy sire, 
Provoked to passion, once more rouse to ire 
The stern Pelides; and nor sacred age, 
Nor Jovea__s command, should check the rising rage. 
This done, the garments oa__er the corse they spread; 
Achilles lifts it to the funeral bed: 
Then, while the body on the car they laid, 
He groans, and calls on loved Patroclusa__ shade: 
a_oeIf, in that gloom which never light must know, 
The deeds of mortals touch the ghosts below, 
O friend! forgive me, that I thus fulfil 
(Restoring Hector) heavena__s unquestiona__d will. 
The gifts the father gave, be ever thine, 
To grace thy manes, and adorn thy shrine.a__296 
He said, and, entering, took his seat of state; 
Where full before him reverend Priam sate; 
To whom, composed, the godlike chief begun: 
a_oeLo! to thy prayer restored, thy breathless son; 
Extended on the funeral couch he lies; 
And soon as morning paints the eastern skies, 
The sight is granted to thy longing eyes: 
But now the peaceful hours of sacred night 
Demand reflection, and to rest invite: 
Nor thou, O father! thus consumed with woe, 
The common cares that nourish life forego. 
Not thus did Niobe, of form divine, 
A parent once, whose sorrows equalla__d thine: 
Six youthful sons, as many blooming maids, 
In one sad day beheld the Stygian shades; 
Those by Apolloa__s silver bow were slain, 
[pg 447] 
These, Cynthiaa__s arrows stretcha__d upon the plain: 
So was her pride chastised by wrath divine, 
Who matcha__d her own with bright Latonaa__s line; 
But two the goddess, twelve the queen enjoya__d; 
Those boasted twelve, the avenging two destroya__d. 
Steepa__d in their blood, and in the dust outspread, 
Nine days, neglected, lay exposed the dead; 
None by to weep them, to inhume them none; 
(For Jove had turna__d the nation all to stone.) 
The gods themselves, at length relenting gave 
The unhappy race the honours of a grave. 
Herself a rock (for such was heavena__s high will) 
Through deserts wild now pours a weeping rill; 
Where round the bed whence Achelous springs, 
The watery fairies dance in mazy rings; 
There high on Sipylusa__s shaggy brow, 
She stands, her own sad monument of woe; 
The rock for ever lasts, the tears for ever flow. 
a_oeSuch griefs, O king! have other parents known; 
Remember theirs, and mitigate thy own. 
The care of heaven thy Hector has appeara__d, 
Nor shall he lie unwept, and uninterra__d; 
Soon may thy aged cheeks in tears be drowna__d, 
And all the eyes of Ilion stream around.a__ 
He said, and, rising, chose the victim ewe 
With silver fleece, which his attendants slew. 
The limbs they sever from the reeking hide, 
With skill prepare them, and in parts divide: 
Each on the coals the separate morsels lays, 
And, hasty, snatches from the rising blaze. 
With bread the glittering canisters they load, 
Which round the board Automedon bestowa__d. 
The chief himself to each his portion placed, 
And each indulging shared in sweet repast. 
When now the rage of hunger was repressa__d, 
The wondering hero eyes his royal guest: 
No less the royal guest the hero eyes, 
His godlike aspect and majestic size; 
Here, youthful grace and noble fire engage; 
And there, the mild benevolence of age. 
Thus gazing long, the silence neither broke, 
(A solemn scene!) at length the father spoke: 
a_oePermit me now, beloved of Jove! to steep 
My careful temples in the dew of sleep: 
For, since the day that numbera__d with the dead 
My hapless son, the dust has been my bed; 
Soft sleep a stranger to my weeping eyes; 
My only food, my sorrows and my sighs! 
Till now, encouraged by the grace you give, 
I share thy banquet, and consent to live.a__ 
[pg 448] 
With that, Achilles bade prepare the bed, 
With purple soft and shaggy carpets spread; 
Forth, by the flaming lights, they bend their way, 
And place the couches, and the coverings lay. 
Then he: a_oeNow, father, sleep, but sleep not here; 
Consult thy safety, and forgive my fear, 
Lest any Argive, at this hour awake, 
To ask our counsel, or our orders take, 
Approaching sudden to our opena__d tent, 
Perchance behold thee, and our grace prevent. 
Should such report thy honoura__d person here, 
The king of men the ransom might defer; 
But say with speed, if aught of thy desire 
Remains unaska__d; what time the rites require 
To inter thy Hector? For, so long we stay 
Our slaughtering arm, and bid the hosts obey.a__ 
a_oeIf then thy will permit (the monarch said) 
To finish all due honours to the dead, 
This of thy grace accord: to thee are known 
The fears of Ilion, closed within her town; 
And at what distance from our walls aspire 
The hills of Ide, and forests for the fire. 
Nine days to vent our sorrows I request, 
The tenth shall see the funeral and the feast; 
The next, to raise his monument be given; 
The twelfth we war, if war be dooma__d by heaven!a__ 
a_oeThis thy request (replied the chief) enjoy: 
Till then our arms suspend the fall of Troy.a__ 
Then gave his hand at parting, to prevent 
The old mana__s fears, and turna__d within the tent; 
Where fair Briseis, bright in blooming charms, 
Expects her hero with desiring arms. 
But in the porch the king and herald rest; 
Sad dreams of care yet wandering in their breast. 
Now gods and men the gifts of sleep partake; 
Industrious Hermes only was awake, 
The kinga__s return revolving in his mind, 
To pass the ramparts, and the watch to blind. 
The power descending hovera__d oa__er his head: 
a_oeAnd sleepa__st thou, father! (thus the vision said:) 
Now dost thou sleep, when Hector is restored? 
Nor fear the Grecian foes, or Grecian lord? 
Thy presence here should stern Atrides see, 
Thy still surviving sons may sue for thee; 
May offer all thy treasures yet contain, 
To spare thy age; and offer all in vain.a__ 
Waked with the word the trembling sire arose, 
And raised his friend: the god before him goes: 
He joins the mules, directs them with his hand, 
And moves in silence through the hostile land. 
[pg 449] 
When now to Xanthusa__ yellow stream they drove, 
(Xanthus, immortal progeny of Jove,) 
The winged deity forsook their view, 
And in a moment to Olympus flew. 
Now shed Aurora round her saffron ray, 
Sprang through the gates of light, and gave the day: 
Charged with the mournful load, to Ilion go 
The sage and king, majestically slow. 
Cassandra first beholds, from Iliona__s spire, 
The sad procession of her hoary sire; 
Then, as the pensive pomp advanced more near, 
(Her breathless brother stretched upon the bier,) 
A shower of tears oa__erflows her beauteous eyes, 
Alarming thus all Ilion with her cries: 
a_oeTurn here your steps, and here your eyes employ, 
Ye wretched daughters, and ye sons of Troy! 
If ea__er ye rusha__d in crowds, with vast delight, 
To hail your hero glorious from the fight, 
Now meet him dead, and let your sorrows flow; 
Your common triumph, and your common woe.a__ 
In thronging crowds they issue to the plains; 
Nor man nor woman in the walls remains; 
In every face the self-same grief is shown; 
And Troy sends forth one universal groan. 
At Scaeaa__s gates they meet the mourning wain, 
Hang on the wheels, and grovel round the slain. 
The wife and mother, frantic with despair, 
Kiss his pale cheek, and rend their scattera__d hair: 
Thus wildly wailing, at the gates they lay; 
And there had sigha__d and sorrowa__d out the day; 
But godlike Priam from the chariot rose: 
a_oeForbear (he cried) this violence of woes; 
First to the palace let the car proceed, 
Then pour your boundless sorrows oa__er the dead.a__ 
The waves of people at his word divide, 
Slow rolls the chariot through the following tide; 
Even to the palace the sad pomp they wait: 
They weep, and place him on the bed of state. 
A melancholy choir attend around, 
With plaintive sighs, and musica__s solemn sound: 
Alternately they sing, alternate flow 
The obedient tears, melodious in their woe. 
While deeper sorrows groan from each full heart, 
And nature speaks at every pause of art. 
First to the corse the weeping consort flew; 
Around his neck her milk-white arms she threw, 
a_oeAnd oh, my Hector! Oh, my lord! (she cries) 
Snatcha__d in thy bloom from these desiring eyes! 
Thou to the dismal realms for ever gone! 
And I abandona__d, desolate, alone! 
[pg 450] 
An only son, once comfort of our pains, 
Sad product now of hapless love, remains! 
Never to manly age that son shall rise, 
Or with increasing graces glad my eyes: 
For Ilion now (her great defender slain) 
Shall sink a smoking ruin on the plain. 
Who now protects her wives with guardian care? 
Who saves her infants from the rage of war? 
Now hostile fleets must waft those infants oa__er 
(Those wives must wait them) to a foreign shore: 
Thou too, my son, to barbarous climes shall go, 
The sad companion of thy mothera__s woe; 
Driven hence a slave before the victora__s sword 
Condemna__d to toil for some inhuman lord: 
Or else some Greek whose father pressa__d the plain, 
Or son, or brother, by great Hector slain, 
In Hectora__s blood his vengeance shall enjoy, 
And hurl thee headlong from the towers of Troy.297 
For thy stern father never spared a foe: 
Thence all these tears, and all this scene of woe! 
Thence many evils his sad parents bore, 
His parents many, but his consort more. 
Why gava__st thou not to me thy dying hand? 
And why received not I thy last command? 
Some word thou woulda__st have spoke, which, sadly dear, 
My soul might keep, or utter with a tear; 
Which never, never could be lost in air, 
Fixa__d in my heart, and oft repeated there!a__ 
[pg 451] 
Thus to her weeping maids she makes her moan, 
Her weeping handmaids echo groan for groan. 
The mournful mother next sustains her part: 
a_oeO thou, the best, the dearest to my heart! 
Of all my race thou most by heaven approved, 
And by the immortals even in death beloved! 
While all my other sons in barbarous bands 
Achilles bound, and sold to foreign lands, 
This felt no chains, but went a glorious ghost, 
Free, and a hero, to the Stygian coast. 
Sentenced, a__tis true, by his inhuman doom, 
Thy noble corse was dragga__d around the tomb; 
(The tomb of him thy warlike arm had slain;) 
Ungenerous insult, impotent and vain! 
Yet glowa__st thou fresh with every living grace; 
No mark of pain, or violence of face: 
Rosy and fair! as Phoebusa__ silver bow 
Dismissa__d thee gently to the shades below.a__ 
Thus spoke the dame, and melted into tears. 
Sad Helen next in pomp of grief appears; 
Fast from the shining sluices of her eyes 
Fall the round crystal drops, while thus she cries. 
a_oeAh, dearest friend! in whom the gods had joina__d298 
Tne mildest manners with the bravest mind, 
Now twice ten years (unhappy years) are oa__er 
Since Paris brought me to the Trojan shore, 
(O had I perisha__d, ere that form divine 
Seduced this soft, this easy heart of mine!) 
Yet was it nea__er my fate, from thee to find 
A deed ungentle, or a word unkind. 
When others cursed the authoress of their woe, 
Thy pity checka__d my sorrows in their flow. 
If some proud brother eyed me with disdain, 
Or scornful sister with her sweeping train, 
Thy gentle accents softena__d all my pain. 
For thee I mourn, and mourn myself in thee, 
The wretched source of all this misery. 
The fate I caused, for ever I bemoan; 
Sad Helen has no friend, now thou art gone! 
Through Troya__s wide streets abandona__d shall I roam! 
In Troy deserted, as abhorra__d at home!a__ 
So spoke the fair, with sorrow-streaming eye. 
Distressful beauty melts each stander-by. 
On all around the infectious sorrow grows; 
But Priam checka__d the torrent as it rose: 
a_oePerform, ye Trojans! what the rites require, 
And fell the forests for a funeral pyre; 
Twelve days, nor foes nor secret ambush dread; 
Achilles grants these honours to the dead.a__299 
Illustration: FUNERAL OF HECTOR. 
FUNERAL OF HECTOR. 
He spoke, and, at his word, the Trojan train 
Their mules and oxen harness to the wain, 
Pour through the gates, and fella__d from Idaa__s crown, 
[pg 452] 
Roll back the gathera__d forests to the town. 
These toils continue nine succeeding days, 
And high in air a sylvan structure raise. 
But when the tenth fair morn began to shine, 
Forth to the pile was borne the man divine, 
And placed aloft; while all, with streaming eyes, 
Beheld the flames and rolling smokes arise. 
Soon as Aurora, daughter of the dawn, 
With rosy lustre streaka__d the dewy lawn, 
Again the mournful crowds surround the pyre, 
And quench with wine the yet remaining fire. 
The snowy bones his friends and brothers place 
(With tears collected) in a golden vase; 
The golden vase in purple palls they rolla__d, 
Of softest texture, and inwrought with gold. 
Last oa__er the urn the sacred earth they spread, 
And raised the tomb, memorial of the dead. 
(Strong guards and spies, till all the rites were done, 
Watcha__d from the rising to the setting sun.) 
All Troy then moves to Priama__s court again, 
A solemn, silent, melancholy train: 
Assembled there, from pious toil they rest, 
And sadly shared the last sepulchral feast. 
Such honours Ilion to her hero paid, 
And peaceful slept the mighty Hectora__s shade.300 
[pg 453] 
CONCLUDING NOTE. 
We have now passed through the Iliad, and seen the anger of Achilles, 
and the terrible effects of it, at an end, as that only was the subject 
of the poem, and the nature of epic poetry would not permit our author 
to proceed to the event of the war, it perhaps may be acceptable to the 
common reader to give a short account of what happened to Troy and the 
chief actors in this poem after the conclusion of it. 
I need not mention that Troy was taken soon after the death of Hector 
by the stratagem of the wooden horse, the particulars of which are 
described by Virgil in the second book of the A_neid. 
Achilles fell before Troy, by the hand of Paris, by the shot of an 
arrow in his heel, as Hector had prophesied at his death, lib. xxii. 
The unfortunate Priam was killed by Pyrrhus, the son of Achilles. 
Ajax, after the death of Achilles, had a contest with Ulysses for the 
armour of Vulcan, but being defeated in his aim, he slew himself 
through indignation. 
Helen, after the death of Paris, married Deiphobus his brother, and at 
the taking of Troy betrayed him, in order to reconcile herself to 
Menelaus her first husband, who received her again into favour. 
Agamemnon at his return was barbarously murdered by A_gysthus, at the 
instigation of Clytemnestra his wife, who in his absence had 
dishonoured his bed with A_gysthus. 
Diomed, after the fall of Troy, was expelled his own country, and 
scarce escaped with his life from his adulterous wife A_giale; but at 
last was received by Daunus in Apulia, and shared his kingdom; it is 
uncertain how he died. 
Nestor lived in peace with his children, in Pylos, his native country. 
Ulysses also, after innumerable troubles by sea and land, at last 
returned in safety to Ithaca, which is the subject of Homera__s Odyssey. 
For what remains, I beg to be excused from the ceremonies of taking 
leave at the end of my work, and from embarrassing myself, or others, 
with any defences or apologies about it. But instead of endeavouring to 
raise a vain monument to myself, of the merits or difficulties of it 
(which must be left to the world, to truth, and to posterity), let me 
leave behind me a memorial of my friendship with one of the most 
valuable of men, as well as finest writers, of my age and country, one 
who has tried, and knows by his own experience, how hard an undertaking 
it is to do justice to Homer, and one whom (I am sure) sincerely 
rejoices with me at the period of my labours. To him, therefore, having 
brought this long work to a conclusion, I desire to dedicate it, and to 
have the honour and satisfaction of placing together, in this manner, 
the names of Mr. CONGREVE, and of 
March 25, 1720 
A. POPE 
Ton theon de eupoiiaa_"to mae epi pleon me procophai en poiaetikn kai 
allois epitaeoeimasi en ois isos a kateschethaen, ei aesthomaen emautan 
euodos proionta. 
M. AUREL ANTON _de Seipso,_ lib. i. Section 17. 
END OF THE ILLIAD 
Footnotes 
1. a_oeWhat,a__ says Archdeacon Wilberforce, a_oeis the natural root of loyalty 
as distinguished from such mere selfish desire of personal security as 
is apt to take its place in civilized times, but that consciousness of 
a natural bond among the families of men which gives a fellow-feeling 
to whole clans and nations, and thus enlists their affections in behalf 
of those time-honoured representatives of their ancient blood, in whose 
success they feel a personal interest? Hence the delight when we 
recognize an act of nobility or justice in our hereditary princes 
a_oea__Tuque prior, tu parce genus qui ducis Olympo, Projice tela manu 
_sanguis meus_a__ a_oeSo strong is this feeling, that it regains an 
engrafted influence even when history witnesses that vast convulsions 
have rent and weakened it and the Celtic feeling towards the Stuarts 
has been rekindled in our own days towards the grand daughter of George 
the Third of Hanover. 
a_oeSomewhat similar may be seen in the disposition to idolize those great 
lawgivers of mana__s race, who have given expression, in the immortal 
language of song, to the deeper inspirations of our nature. The 
thoughts of Homer or of Shakespere are the universal inheritance of the 
human race. In this mutual ground every man meets his brother, they 
have been bet forth by the providence of God to vindicate for all of us 
what nature could effect, and that, in these representatives of our 
race, we might recognize our common benefactors.a__a_"_Doctrine of the 
Incarnation,_ pp. 9, 10. 
2. Eikos de min aen kai mnaemoruna panton grapherthai. Vit. Hom. in 
Schweigh Herodot t. iv. p. 299, sq. Section 6. I may observe that this 
Life has been paraphrased in English by my learned young friend Kenneth 
R. H. Mackenzie, and appended to my prose translation of the Odyssey. 
The present abridgement however, will contain all that is of use to the 
reader, for the biographical value of the treatise is most 
insignificant. 
3. a_"_I.e._ both of composing and reciting verses for as Blair observes, 
a_oeThe first poets sang their own verses.a__ Sextus Empir. adv. Mus. p. 360 
ed. Fabric. Ou hamelei ge toi kai oi poiaetai melopoioi legontai, kai 
ta Omaerou epae to palai pros lyran aedeto. 
a_oeThe voice,a__ observes Heeren, a_oewas always accompanied by some 
instrument. The bard was provided with a harp on which he played a 
prelude, to elevate and inspire his mind, and with which he accompanied 
the song when begun. His voice probably preserved a medium between 
singing and recitation; the words, and not the melody were regarded by 
the listeners, hence it was necessary for him to remain intelligible to 
all. In countries where nothing similar is found, it is difficult to 
represent such scenes to the mind; but whoever has had an opportunity 
of listening to the improvisation of Italy, can easily form an idea of 
Demodocus and Phemius.a__a_"_Ancient Greece,_ p. 94. 
4. a_oeShould it not be, since _my_ arrival? asks Mackenzie, observing 
that a_oepoplars can hardly live so longa__. But setting aside the fact that 
we must not expect consistency in a mere romance, the ancients had a 
superstitious belief in the great age of trees which grew near places 
consecrated by the presence of gods and great men. See Cicero de Legg 
II I, sub init., where he speaks of the plane tree under which Socrates 
used to walk and of the tree at Delos, where Latona gave birth to 
Apollo. This passage is referred to by Stephanus of Byzantium, _s. v._ 
N. T. p. 490, ed. de Pinedo. I omit quoting any of the dull epigrams 
ascribed to Homer for, as Mr. Justice Talfourd rightly observes, a_oeThe 
authenticity of these fragments depends upon that of the pseudo 
Herodotean Life of Homer, from which they are taken.a__ Lit of Greece, 
pp. 38 in Encycl. Metrop. Cf. Coleridge, Classic Poets, p. 317. 
5. It is quoted as the work of Cleobulus, by Diogenes Laert. Vit. 
Cleob. p. 62, ed. Casaub. 
6. I trust I am justified in employing this as an equivalent for the 
Greek leschai. 
7. Os ei tous, Homerous doxei trephein autois, omilon pollon te kai 
achreoin exousin. enteuthen de kai tounoma Homeros epekrataese to 
Melaesigenei apo taes symphoraes oi gar Kumaioi tous tuphlous Homerous 
legousin. Vit. Hom. _l. c._ p. 311. The etymology has been condemned by 
recent scholars. See Welcker, Epische Cyclus, p. 127, and Mackenziea__s 
note, p. xiv. 
8. Thestorides, thnetoisin anoiston poleon per, ouden aphrastoteron 
peletai noou anthropoisin. Ibid. p. 315. During his stay at Phocoea, 
Homer is said to have composed the Little Iliad, and the Phocoeid. See 
Mullera__s Hist. of Lit., vi. Section 3. Welcker, _l. c._ pp. 132, 272, 
358, sqq., and Mure, Gr. Lit. vol. ii. p. 284, sq. 
9. This is so pretty a picture of early manners and hospitality, that 
it is almost a pity to find that it is obviously a copy from the 
Odyssey. See the fourteenth book. In fact, whoever was the author of 
this fictitious biography, he showed some tact in identifying Homer 
with certain events described in his poems, and in eliciting from them 
the germs of something like a personal narrative. 
10. Dia logon estionto. A common metaphor. So Plato calls the parties 
conversing daitumones, or estiatores. Tim. i. p. 522 A. Cf. Themist. 
Orat. vi. p. 168, and xvi. p. 374, ed. Petav So diaegaemasi sophois 
omou kai terpnois aedio taen Thoinaen tois hestiomenois epoiei, 
Choricius in Fabric. Bibl. Gr. T. viii. P. 851. logois gar estia, 
Athenaeus vii p 275, A 
11. It was at Bolissus, and in the house of this Chian citizen, that 
Homer is said to have written the Batrachomyomachia, or Battle of the 
Frogs and Mice, the Epicichlidia, and some other minor works. 
12. Chandler, Travels, vol. i. p. 61, referred to in the Voyage 
Pittoresque dans la Grece, vol. i. P. 92, where a view of the spot is 
given of which the author candidly says,a_" a_oeJe ne puis repondre da__une 
exactitude scrupuleuse dans la vue generale que ja__en donne, car etant 
alle seul pour la__examiner je perdis mon crayon, et je fus oblige de 
ma__en fier a ma memoire. Je ne crois cependant pas avoir trop a me 
plaindre da__elle en cette occasion.a__ 
13. A more probable reason for this companionship, and for the 
character of Mentor itself, is given by the allegorists, viz.: the 
assumption of Mentora__s form by the guardian deity of the wise Ulysses, 
Minerva. The classical reader may compare Plutarch, Opp. t. ii. p. 880; 
_Xyland._ Heraclid. Pont. Alleg. Hom. p. 531-5, of Galea__s Opusc. 
Mythol. Dionys. Halic. de Hom. Poes. c. 15; Apul. de Deo Socrat. s. f. 
14. Vit. Hom. Section 28. 
15. The riddle is given in Section 35. Compare Mackenziea__s note, p. 
xxx. 
16. Heerena__s Ancient Greece, p. 96. 
17. Compare Sir E. L. Bulwera__s Caxtons v. i. p. 4. 
18. Pericles and Aspasia, Letter lxxxiv., Works, vol ii. p. 387. 
19. Quarterly Review, No. lxxxvii., p. 147. 
20. Viz., the following beautiful passage, for the translation of which 
I am indebted to Coleridge, Classic Poets, p. 286. 
a_oeOrigias, farewell! and oh! remember me 
Hereafter, when some stranger from the sea, 
A hapless wanderer, may your isle explore, 
And ask you, maid, of all the bards you boast, 
Who sings the sweetest, and delights you most 
Oh! answer all,a_"a__A blind old man and poor 
Sweetest he singsa_"and dwells on Chiosa__ rocky shore.a__a__ 
_See_ Thucyd. iii, 104. 
21. Longin., de Sublim., ix. Section 26. Othen en tae Odysseia 
pareikasai tis an kataduomeno ton Omaeron haelio, oo dixa taes 
sphodrotaetos paramenei to megethos 
22. See Tatian, quoted in Fabric. Bibl. Gr. v. II t. ii. Mr. Mackenzie 
has given three brief but elaborate papers on the different writers on 
the subject, which deserve to be consulted. See Notes and Queries, vol. 
v. pp. 99, 171, and 221. His own views are moderate, and perhaps as 
satisfactory, on the whole, as any of the hypotheses hitherto put 
forth. In fact, they consist in an attempt to blend those hypotheses 
into something like consistency, rather than in advocating any 
individual theory. 
23. Letters to Phileleuth; Lips. 
24. Hist. of Greece, vol. ii. p. 191, sqq. 
25. It is, indeed not easy to calculate the height to which the memory 
may be cultivated. To take an ordinary case, we might refer to that of 
any first rate actor, who must be prepared, at a very short warning, to 
a__rhapsodize,a__ night after night, parts which when laid together, would 
amount to an immense number of lines. But all this is nothing to two 
instances of our own day. Visiting at Naples a gentleman of the highest 
intellectual attainments, and who held a distinguished rank among the 
men of letters in the last century, he informed us that the day before 
he had passed much time in examining a man, not highly educated, who 
had learned to repeat the whole Gierusalemme of Tasso, not only to 
recite it consecutively, but also to repeat those stanzas in utter 
defiance of the sense, either forwards or backwards, or from the eighth 
line to the first, alternately the odd and even linesa_"in short, 
whatever the passage required; the memory, which seemed to cling to the 
words much more than to the sense, had it at such perfect command, that 
it could produce it under any form. Our informant went on to state that 
this singular being was proceeding to learn the Orlando Furioso in the 
same manner. But even this instance is less wonderful than one as to 
which we may appeal to any of our readers that happened some twenty 
years ago to visit the town of Stirling, in Scotland. No such person 
can have forgotten the poor, uneducated man Blind Jamie who could 
actually repeat, after a few minutes consideration any verse required 
from any part of the Biblea_"even the obscurest and most unimportant 
enumeration of mere proper names not excepted. We do not mention these 
facts as touching the more difficult part of the question before us, 
but facts they are; and if we find so much difficulty in calculating 
the extent to which the mere memory may be cultivated, are we, in these 
days of multifarious reading, and of countless distracting affairs, 
fair judges of the perfection to which the invention and the memory 
combined may attain in a simpler age, and among a more single minded 
people?a_"Quarterly Review, _l. c.,_ p. 143, sqq. 
Heeren steers between the two opinions, observing that, a_oeThe 
Dschungariade of the Calmucks is said to surpass the poems of Homer in 
length, as much as it stands beneath them in merit, and yet it exists 
only in the memory of a people which is not unacquainted with writing. 
But the songs of a nation are probably the last things which are 
committed to writing, for the very reason that they are remembered.a__a_" 
_Ancient Greece._ p. 100. 
26. Vol. II p. 198, sqq. 
27. Quarterly Review, _l. c.,_ p. 131 sq. 
28. Betrachtungen uber die Ilias. Berol. 1841. See Grote, p. 204. Notes 
and Queries, vol. v. p. 221. 
29. Prolegg. pp. xxxii., xxxvi., &c. 
30. Vol. ii. p. 214 sqq. 
31. a_oeWho,a__ says Cicero, de Orat. iii. 34, a_oewas more learned in that 
age, or whose eloquence is reported to have been more perfected by 
literature than that of Peisistratus, who is said first to have 
disposed the books of Homer in the order in which we now have them?a__ 
Compare Wolfa__s Prolegomena, Section 33 
32. a_oeThe first book, together with the eighth, and the books from the 
eleventh to the twenty-second inclusive, seems to form the primary 
organization of the poem, then properly an Achilleis.a__a_"Grote, vol. ii. 
p. 235 
33. K. R. H. Mackenzie, Notes and Queries, p. 222 sqq. 
34. See his Epistle to Raphelingius, in Schroedera__s edition, 4to., 
Delphis, 1728. 
35. Ancient Greece, p. 101. 
36. The best description of this monument will be found in Vauxa__s 
a_oeAntiquities of the British Museum,a__ p. 198 sq. The monument itself 
(Towneley Sculptures, No. 123) is well known. 
37. Coleridge, Classic Poets, p. 276. 
38. Preface to her Homer. 
39. Hesiod. Opp. et Dier. Lib. I. vers. 155, &c. 
40. The following argument of the Iliad, corrected in a few 
particulars, is translated from Bitaube, and is, perhaps, the neatest 
summary that has ever been drawn up:a_"a_oeA hero, injured by his general, 
and animated with a noble resentment, retires to his tent; and for a 
season withdraws himself and his troops from the war. During this 
interval, victory abandons the army, which for nine years has been 
occupied in a great enterprise, upon the successful termination of 
which the honour of their country depends. The general, at length 
opening his eyes to the fault which he had committed, deputes the 
principal officers of his army to the incensed hero, with commission to 
make compensation for the injury, and to tender magnificent presents. 
The hero, according to the proud obstinacy of his character, persists 
in his animosity; the army is again defeated, and is on the verge of 
entire destruction. This inexorable man has a friend; this friend weeps 
before him, and asks for the heroa__s arms, and for permission to go to 
the war in his stead. The eloquence of friendship prevails more than 
the intercession of the ambassadors or the gifts of the general. He 
lends his armour to his friend, but commands him not to engage with the 
chief of the enemya__s army, because he reserves to himself the honour of 
that combat, and because he also fears for his frienda__s life. The 
prohibition is forgotten; the friend listens to nothing but his 
courage; his corpse is brought back to the hero, and the heroa__s arms 
become the prize of the conqueror. Then the hero, given up to the most 
lively despair, prepares to fight; he receives from a divinity new 
armour, is reconciled with his general and, thirsting for glory and 
revenge, enacts prodigies of valour, recovers the victory, slays the 
enemya__s chief, honours his friend with superb funeral rites, and 
exercises a cruel vengeance on the body of his destroyer; but finally 
appeased by the tears and prayers of the father of the slain warrior, 
restores to the old man the corpse of his son, which he buries with due 
solemnities.a__a_"Coleridge, p. 177, sqq. 
41. Vultures: Pope is more accurate than the poet he translates, for 
Homer writes a_oea prey to dogs and to _all_ kinds of birds. But all kinds 
of birds are not carnivorous. 
42. a_"_i.e._ during the whole time of their striving the will of Jove 
was being gradually accomplished. 
43. 
Compare Miltona__s a_oeParadise Losta__ i. 6 
a_oeSing, heavenly Muse, that on the secret top 
Of Horeb, or of Sinai, didst inspire 
That shepherd.a__ 
44. 
a_"_Latonaa__s son: i.e._ Apollo. 
45. 
a_"_King of men:_ Agamemnon. 
46. 
a_"_Brother kings:_ Menelaus and Agamemnon. 
47. a_"_Smintheus_ an epithet taken from sminthos, the Phrygian name for 
a _mouse,_ was applied to Apollo for having put an end to a plague of 
mice which had harassed that territory. Strabo, however, says, that 
when the Teucri were migrating from Crete, they were told by an oracle 
to settle in that place, where they should not be attacked by the 
original inhabitants of the land, and that, having halted for the 
night, a number of field-mice came and gnawed away the leathern straps 
of their baggage, and thongs of their armour. In fulfilment of the 
oracle, they settled on the spot, and raised a temple to Sminthean 
Apollo. Grote, a_oeHistory of Greece,a__ i. p. 68, remarks that the a_oeworship 
of Sminthean Apollo, in various parts of the Troad and its neighboring 
territory, dates before the earliest period of Aeolian colonization.a__ 
48. a_"_Cilla,_ a town of Troas near Thebe, so called from Cillus, a 
sister of Hippodamia, slain by OEnomaus. 
49. A mistake. It should be, 
a_oeIf ea__er I roofed thy graceful fane,a__ for the custom of decorating 
temples with garlands was of later date. 
50. a_"_Bent was his bow_ a_oeThe Apollo of Homer, it must be borne in mind, 
is a different character from the deity of the same name in the later 
classical pantheon. Throughout both poems, all deaths from unforeseen 
or invisible causes, the ravages of pestilence, the fate of the young 
child or promising adult, cut off in the germ of infancy or flower of 
youth, of the old man dropping peacefully into the grave, or of the 
reckless sinner suddenly checked in his career of crime, are ascribed 
to the arrows of Apollo or Diana. The oracular functions of the god 
rose naturally out of the above fundamental attributes, for who could 
more appropriately impart to mortals what little foreknowledge Fate 
permitted of her decrees than the agent of her most awful 
dispensations? The close union of the arts of prophecy and song 
explains his additional office of god of music, while the arrows with 
which he and his sister were armed, symbols of sudden death in every 
age, no less naturally procured him that of god of archery. Of any 
connection between Apollo and the Sun, whatever may have existed in the 
more esoteric doctrine of the Greek sanctuaries, there is no trace in 
either Iliad or Odyssey.a__a_"Mure, a_oeHistory of Greek Literature,a__ vol. i. 
p. 478, sq. 
51. It has frequently been observed, that most pestilences begin with 
animals, and that Homer had this fact in mind. 
52. a_"_Convened to council._ The public assembly in the heroic times is 
well characterized by Grote, vol. ii. p 92. a_oeIt is an assembly for 
talk. Communication and discussion to a certain extent by the chiefs in 
person, of the people as listeners and sympathizersa_"often for 
eloquence, and sometimes for quarrela_"but here its ostensible purposes 
end.a__ 
53. Old Jacob Duport, whose a_oeGnomologia Homericaa__ is full of curious 
and useful things, quotes several passages of the ancients, in which 
reference is made to these words of Homer, in maintenance of the belief 
that dreams had a divine origin and an import in which men were 
interested. 
54. Rather, a_oebright-eyed.a__ See the German critics quoted by Arnold. 
55. The prize given to Ajax was Tecmessa, while Ulysses received 
Laodice, the daughter of Cycnus. 
56. The Myrmidons dwelt on the southern borders of Thessaly, and took 
their origin from Myrmido, son of Jupiter and Eurymedusa. It is 
fancifully supposed that the name was derived from myrmaex, an _ant,_ 
a_oebecause they imitated the diligence of the ants, and like them were 
indefatigable, continually employed in cultivating the earth; the 
change from ants to men is founded merely on the equivocation of their 
name, which resembles that of the ant: they bore a further resemblance 
to these little animals, in that instead of inhabiting towns or 
villages, at first they commonly resided in the open fields, having no 
other retreats but dens and the cavities of trees, until Ithacus 
brought them together, and settled them in more secure and comfortable 
habitations.a__a_"Anthona__s a_oeLempriere.a__ 
57. Eustathius, after Heraclides Ponticus and others, allegorizes this 
apparition, as if the appearance of Minerva to Achilles, unseen by the 
rest, was intended to point out the sudden recollection that he would 
gain nothing by intemperate wrath, and that it were best to restrain 
his anger, and only gratify it by withdrawing his services. The same 
idea is rather cleverly worked out by Apuleius, a_oeDe Deo Socratis.a__ 
58. Compare Milton, a_oeParadise Lost,a__ bk. ii: 
a_oeThough his tongue 
Droppa__d manna.a__ 
So Proverbs v. 3, a_oeFor the lips of a strange woman drop as an honey-comb.a__ 
59. Salt water was chiefly used in lustrations, from its being supposed 
to possess certain fiery particles. Hence, if sea-water could not be 
obtained, salt was thrown into the fresh water to be used for the 
lustration. Menander, in Clem. Alex. vii. p.713, hydati perriranai, 
embalon alas, phakois. 
60. The persons of heralds were held inviolable, and they were at 
liberty to travel whither they would without fear of molestation. 
Pollux, Onom. viii. p. 159. The office was generally given to old men, 
and they were believed to be under the especial protection of Jove and 
Mercury. 
61. His mother, Thetis, the daughter of Nereus and Doris, who was 
courted by Neptune and Jupiter. When, however, it was known that the 
son to whom she would give birth must prove greater than his father, it 
was determined to wed her to a mortal, and Peleus, with great 
difficulty, succeeded in obtaining her hand, as she eluded him by 
assuming various forms. Her children were all destroyed by fire through 
her attempts to see whether they were immortal, and Achilles would have 
shared the same fate had not his father rescued him. She afterwards 
rendered him invulnerable by plunging him into the waters of the Styx, 
with the exception of that part of the heel by which she held him. 
Hygin. Fab. 54 
62. Thebe was a city of Mysia, north of Adramyttium. 
63. That is, defrauds me of the prize allotted me by their votes. 
64. Quintus Calaber goes still further in his account of the service 
rendered to Jove by Thetis: 
a_oeNay more, the fetters of Almighty Jove 
She looseda__a_"Dycea__s a_oeCalaber,a__ s. 58. 
65. a_"_To Fates averse._ Of the gloomy destiny reigning throughout the 
Homeric poems, and from which even the gods are not exempt, Schlegel 
well observes, a_oeThis power extends also to the world of godsa_" for the 
Grecian gods are mere powers of naturea_"and although immeasurably higher 
than mortal man, yet, compared with infinitude, they are on an equal 
footing with himself.a__a_"a__Lectures on the Dramaa__ v. p. 67. 
66. It has been observed that the annual procession of the sacred ship 
so often represented on Egyptian monuments, and the return of the deity 
from Ethiopia after some daysa__ absence, serves to show the Ethiopian 
origin of Thebes, and of the worship of Jupiter Ammon. a_oeI think,a__ says 
Heeren, after quoting a passage from Diodorus about the holy ship, 
a_oethat this procession is represented in one of the great sculptured 
reliefs on the temple of Karnak. The sacred ship of Ammon is on the 
shore with its whole equipment, and is towed along by another boat. It 
is therefore on its voyage. This must have been one of the most 
celebrated festivals, since, even according to the interpretation of 
antiquity, Homer alludes to it when he speaks of Jupitera__s visit to the 
Ethiopians, and his twelve daysa__ absence.a__a_"Long, a_oeEgyptian Antiquitiesa__ 
vol. 1 p. 96. Eustathius, vol. 1 p. 98, sq. (ed. Basil) gives this 
interpretation, and likewise an allegorical one, which we will spare 
the reader. 
67. a_"_Atoned,_ i.e. reconciled. This is the proper and most natural 
meaning of the word, as may be seen from Taylora__s remarks in Calmeta__s 
Dictionary, p.110, of my edition. 
68. That is, drawing back their necks while they cut their throats. a_oeIf 
the sacrifice was in honour of the celestial gods, the throat was bent 
upwards towards heaven; but if made to the heroes, or infernal deities, 
it was killed with its throat toward the ground.a__a_" a_oeElgin Marbles,a__ vol 
i. p.81. 
a_oeThe jolly crew, unmindful of the past, 
The quarry share, their plenteous dinner haste, 
Some strip the skin; some portion out the spoil; 
The limbs yet trembling, in the caldrons boil; 
Some on the fire the reeking entrails broil. 
Stretcha__d on the grassy turf, at ease they dine, 
Restore their strength with meat, and cheer their souls with wine.a__ 
Drydena__s a_oeVirgil,a__ i. 293. 
69. a_"_Crowna__d, i.e._ filled to the brim. The custom of adorning goblets 
with flowers was of later date. 
70. a_"_He spoke,_ &c. a_oeWhen a friend inquired of Phidias what pattern he 
had formed his Olympian Jupiter, he is said to have answered by 
repeating the lines of the first Iliad in which the poet represents the 
majesty of the god in the most sublime terms; thereby signifying that 
the genius of Homer had inspired him with it. Those who beheld this 
statue are said to have been so struck with it as to have asked whether 
Jupiter had descended from heaven to show himself to Phidias, or 
whether Phidias had been carried thither to contemplate the god.a__a_" 
a_oeElgin Marbles,a__ vol. xii p.124. 
71. 
a_oeSo was his will 
Pronounced among the gods, and by an oath, 
That shook heava__na__s whole circumference, confirma__d.a__ 
a_oeParadise Losta__ ii. 351. 
72. a_"_A double bowl, i.e._ a vessel with a cup at both ends, something 
like the measures by which a halfpenny or pennyworth of nuts is sold. 
See Buttmann, Lexic. p. 93 sq. 
73. 
a_oeParadise Lost,a__ i. 44. 
a_oeHim tha__ Almighty power 
Hurla__d headlong flaming from th ethereal sky, 
With hideous ruin and combustiona__ 
74. The occasion on which Vulcan incurred Jovea__s displeasure was 
thisa_"After Hercules, had taken and pillaged Troy, Juno raised a storm, 
which drove him to the island of Cos, having previously cast Jove into 
a sleep, to prevent him aiding his son. Jove, in revenge, fastened iron 
anvils to her feet, and hung her from the sky, and Vulcan, attempting 
to relieve her, was kicked down from Olympus in the manner described. 
The allegorists have gone mad in finding deep explanations for this 
amusing fiction. See Heraclides, a_oePonticus,a__ p. 463 sq., ed Gale. The 
story is told by Homer himself in Book xv. The Sinthians were a race of 
robbers, the ancient inhabitants of Lemnos which island was ever after 
sacred to Vulcan. 
a_oeNor was his name unheard or unadored 
In ancient Greece, and in Ausonian land 
Men calla__d him Mulciber, and how he fell 
From heaven, they fabled, thrown by angry Jove 
Sheer oa__er the crystal battlements from morn 
To noon he fell, from noon to dewy eve, 
A summera__s day and with the setting sun 
Droppa__d from the zenith like a falling star 
On Lemnos, tha__ Aegean isle thus they relate.a__ 
a_oeParadise Lost,a__ i. 738 
75. It is ingeniously observed by Grote, vol i p. 463, that a_oeThe gods 
formed a sort of political community of their own which had its 
hierarchy, its distribution of ranks and duties, its contentions for 
power and occasional revolutions, its public meetings in the agora of 
Olympus, and its multitudinous banquets or festivals.a__ 
76. Plato, Rep. iii. p. 437, was so scandalized at this deception of 
Jupitera__s, and at his other attacks on the character of the gods, that 
he would fain sentence him to an honourable banishment. (See Minucius 
Felix, Section 22.) Coleridge, Introd. p. 154, well observes, that the 
supreme father of gods and men had a full right to employ a lying 
spirit to work out his ultimate will. Compare a_oeParadise Lost,a__ v. 646: 
a_oeAnd roseate dews disposed 
All but the unsleeping eyes of God to rest.a__ 
77. a_"_Dream_ ought to be spelt with a capital letter, being, I think, 
evidently personified as the god of dreams. See Anthon and others. 
a_oeWhen, by Minerva sent, a _fraudful_ Dream 
Rusha__d from the skies, the bane of her and Troy.a__ 
Dycea__s a_oeSelect Translations from Quintus Calaber,a__ p.10. 
78. 
a_oeSleepa__st thou, companion dear, what sleep can close 
Thy eye-lids?a__ 
a_"a_oeParadise Lost,a__ v. 673. 
79. This truly military sentiment has been echoed by the approving 
voice of many a general and statesman of antiquity. See Plinya__s 
Panegyric on Trajan. Silius neatly translates it, 
a_oeTurpe duci totam somno consumere noctem.a__ 
80. 
a_"_The same in habit, &c._ 
a_oeTo whom once more the winged god appears; 
His former youthful mien and shape he wears.a__ 
Drydena__s Virgil, iv. 803. 
81. 
a_oeAs bees in spring-time, when 
The sun with Taurus rides, 
Pour forth their populous youth about the hive 
In clusters; they among fresh dews and flowers 
Fly to and fro, or on the smoothed plank, 
The suburb of this straw-built citadel, 
New-nibba__d with balm, expatiate and confer 
Their state affairs. So thick the very crowd 
Swarma__d and were straitena__d.a__a_"a_oeParadise Losta__ i. 768. 
82. It was the heralda__s duty to make the people sit down. a_oeA _standing_ 
agora is a symptom of manifest terror (II. Xviii. 246) an evening 
agora, to which men came elevated by wine, is also the forerunner of 
mischief (a__Odyssey,a__ iii. 138).a__a_"Grote, ii. p. 91, _note._ 
83. This sceptre, like that of Judah (Genesis xlix. 10), is a type of 
the supreme and far-spread dominion of the house of the Atrides. See 
Thucydides i. 9. a_oeIt is traced through the hands of Hermes, he being 
the wealth giving god, whose blessing is most efficacious in furthering 
the process of acquisition.a__a_"Grote, i. p. 212. Compare Quintus Calaber 
(Dycea__s Selections, p. 43). 
a_oeThus the monarch spoke, 
Then pledged the chief in a capacious cup, 
Golden, and framed by art divine (a gift 
Which to Almighty Jove lame Vulcan brought 
Upon his nuptial day, when he espoused 
The Queen of Love), the sire of gods bestowa__d 
The cup on Dardanus, who gave it next 
To Ericthonius Tros received it then, 
And left it, with his wealth, to be possessa__d 
By Ilus he to great Laomedon 
Gave it, and last to Priama__s lot it fell.a__ 
84. 
Grote, i, p. 393, states the number of the Grecian forces at upwards of 
100,000 men. Nichols makes a total of 135,000. 
85. 
a_oeAs thick as when a field 
Of Ceres, ripe for harvest, waving bends 
His bearded grove of ears, which way the wind 
Sways them.a__a_"Paradise Lost,a__ iv. 980, sqq. 
86. This sentiment used to be a popular one with some of the greatest 
tyrants, who abused it into a pretext for unlimited usurpation of 
power. Dion, Caligula, and Domitian were particularly fond of it, and, 
in an extended form, we find the maxim propounded by Creon in the 
Antigone of Sophocles. See some important remarks of Heeren, a_oeAncient 
Greece,a__ ch. vi. p. 105. 
87. It may be remarked, that the character of Thersites, revolting and 
contemptible as it is, serves admirably to develop the disposition of 
Ulysses in a new light, in which mere cunning is less prominent. Of the 
gradual and individual development of Homera__s heroes, Schlegel well 
observes, a_oeIn bas-relief the figures are usually in profile, and in the 
epos all are characterized in the simplest manner in relief; they are 
not grouped together, but follow one another; so Homera__s heroes 
advance, one by one, in succession before us. It has been remarked that 
the _Iliad_ is not definitively closed, but that we are left to suppose 
something both to precede and to follow it. The bas-relief is equally 
without limit, and may be continued _ad infinitum,_ either from before 
or behind, on which account the ancients preferred for it such subjects 
as admitted of an indefinite extension, sacrificial processions, 
dances, and lines of combatants, and hence they also exhibit 
bas-reliefs on curved surfaces, such as vases, or the frieze of a 
rotunda, where, by the curvature, the two ends are withdrawn from our 
sight, and where, while we advance, one object appears as another 
disappears. Reading Homer is very much like such a circuit; the present 
object alone arresting our attention, we lose sight of what precedes, 
and do not concern ourselves about what is to follow.a__a_"a_oeDramatic 
Literature,a__ p. 75. 
88. a_oeThere cannot be a clearer indication than this description a_"so 
graphic in the original poema_"of the true character of the Homeric 
agora. The multitude who compose it are listening and acquiescent, not 
often hesitating, and never refractory to the chief. The fate which 
awaits a presumptuous critic, even where his virulent reproaches are 
substantially well-founded, is plainly set forth in the treatment of 
Thersites; while the unpopularity of such a character is attested even 
more by the excessive pains which Homer takes to heap upon him 
repulsive personal deformities, than by the chastisement of Odysseus he 
is lame, bald, crook-backed, of misshapen head, and squinting 
vision.a__a_"Grote, vol. i. p. 97. 
89. According to Pausanias, both the sprig and the remains of the tree 
were exhibited in his time. The tragedians, Lucretius and others, 
adopted a different fable to account for the stoppage at Aulis, and 
seem to have found the sacrifice of Iphigena better suited to form the 
subject of a tragedy. Compare Drydena__s a_oeA_neid,a__ vol. iii. sqq. 
90. a_"_Full of his god, i.e.,_ Apollo, filled with the prophetic spirit. 
a_oe_The_ goda__ would be more simple and emphatic. 
91. Those critics who have maintained that the a_oeCatalogue of Shipsa__ is 
an interpolation, should have paid more attention to these lines, which 
form a most natural introduction to their enumeration. 
92. The following observation will be useful to Homeric readers: 
a_oeParticular animals were, at a later time, consecrated to particular 
deities. To Jupiter, Ceres, Juno, Apollo, and Bacchus victims of 
advanced age might be offered. An ox of five years old was considered 
especially acceptable to Jupiter. A black bull, a ram, or a boar pig, 
were offerings for Neptune. A heifer, or a sheep, for Minerva. To Ceres 
a sow was sacrificed, as an enemy to corn. The goat to Bacchus, because 
he fed on vines. Diana was propitiated with a stag; and to Venus the 
dove was consecrated. The infernal and evil deities were to be appeased 
with black victims. The most acceptable of all sacrifices was the 
heifer of a year old, which had never borne the yoke. It was to be 
perfect in every limb, healthy, and without blemish.a__a_"a_oeElgin Marbles,a__ 
vol. i. p. 78. 
93. a_"_Idomeneus,_ son of Deucalion, was king of Crete. Having vowed, 
during a tempest, on his return from Troy, to sacrifice to Neptune the 
first creature that should present itself to his eye on the Cretan 
shore, his son fell a victim to his rash vow. 
94. a_"_Tydeusa__ son, i.e._ Diomed. 
95. That is, Ajax, the son of Oileus, a Locrian. He must be 
distinguished from the other, who was king of Salamis. 
96. A great deal of nonsense has been written to account for the word 
_unbid,_ in this line. Even Plato, a_oeSympos.a__ p. 315, has found some 
curious meaning in what, to us, appears to need no explanation. Was 
there any _heroic_ rule of etiquette which prevented one brother-king 
visiting another without a formal invitation? 
97. Fresh water fowl, especially swans, were found in great numbers 
about the Asian Marsh, a fenny tract of country in Lydia, formed by the 
river Cayster, near its mouth. See Virgil, a_oeGeorgics,a__ vol. i. 383, sq. 
98. a_"_Scamander,_ or Scamandros, was a river of Troas, rising, 
according to Strabo, on the highest part of Mount Ida, in the same hill 
with the Granicus and the OEdipus, and falling into the sea at Sigaeum; 
everything tends to identify it with Mendere, as Wood, Rennell, and 
others maintain; the Mendere is 40 miles long, 300 feet broad, deep in 
the time of flood, nearly dry in the summer. Dr. Clarke successfully 
combats the opinion of those who make the Scamander to have arisen from 
the springs of Bounabarshy, and traces the source of the river to the 
highest mountain in the chain of Ida, now Kusdaghy; receives the Simois 
in its course; towards its mouth it is very muddy, and flows through 
marshes. Between the Scamander and Simois, Homera__s Troy is supposed to 
have stood: this river, according to Homer, was called Xanthus by the 
gods, Scamander by men. The waters of the Scamander had the singular 
property of giving a beautiful colour to the hair or wool of such 
animals as bathed in them; hence the three goddesses, Minerva, Juno, 
and Venus, bathed there before they appeared before Paris to obtain the 
golden apple: the name Xanthus, a_oeyellow,a__ was given to the Scamander, 
from the peculiar colour of its waters, still applicable to the 
Mendere, the yellow colour of whose waters attracts the attention of 
travellers. 
99. It should be a_oehis _chest_ like Neptune.a__ The torso of Neptune, in 
the a_oeElgin Marbles,a__ No. 103, (vol. ii. p. 26,) is remarkable for its 
breadth and massiveness of development. 
100. 
a_oeSay first, for heava__n hides nothing from thy view.a__ 
a_"a_oeParadise Lost,a__ i. 27. 
a_oeMa dia__ tu, Musa, come i primi danni 
Mandassero a Cristiani, e di quai parti: 
Tu a__l sai; ma di tanta__ opra a noi si lunge 
Debil aura di fama appena giunge.a__ 
a_"a_oeGier. Lib.a__ iv. 19. 
101. a_oeThe Catalogue is, perhaps, the portion of the poem in favour of 
which a claim to separate authorship has been most plausibly urged. 
Although the example of Homer has since rendered some such formal 
enumeration of the forces engaged, a common practice in epic poems 
descriptive of great warlike adventures, still so minute a statistical 
detail can neither be considered as imperatively required, nor perhaps 
such as would, in ordinary cases, suggest itself to the mind of a poet. 
Yet there is scarcely any portion of the Iliad where both historical 
and internal evidence are more clearly in favour of a connection from 
the remotest period, with the remainder of the work. The composition of 
the Catalogue, whensoever it may have taken place, necessarily presumes 
its authora__s acquaintance with a previously existing Iliad. It were 
impossible otherwise to account for the harmony observable in the 
recurrence of so vast a number of proper names, most of them 
historically unimportant, and not a few altogether fictitious: or of so 
many geographical and genealogical details as are condensed in these 
few hundred lines, and incidentally scattered over the thousands which 
follow: equally inexplicable were the pointed allusions occurring in 
this episode to events narrated in the previous and subsequent text, 
several of which could hardly be of traditional notoriety, but through 
the medium of the Iliad.a__a_"Mure, a_oeLanguage and Literature of Greece,a__ 
vol. i. p. 263. 
102. a_"_Twice Sixty:_ a_oeThucydides observes that the Boeotian vessels, 
which carried one hundred and twenty men each, were probably meant to 
be the largest in the fleet, and those of Philoctetes, carrying fifty 
each, the smallest. The average would be eighty-five, and Thucydides 
supposes the troops to have rowed and navigated themselves; and that 
very few, besides the chiefs, went as mere passengers or landsmen. In 
short, we have in the Homeric descriptions the complete picture of an 
Indian or African war canoe, many of which are considerably larger than 
the largest scale assigned to those of the Greeks. If the total number 
of the Greek ships be taken at twelve hundred, according to Thucydides, 
although in point of fact there are only eleven hundred and eighty-six 
in the Catalogue, the amount of the army, upon the foregoing average, 
will be about a hundred and two thousand men. The historian considers 
this a small force as representing all Greece. Bryant, comparing it 
with the allied army at Platae, thinks it so large as to prove the 
entire falsehood of the whole story; and his reasonings and 
calculations are, for their curiosity, well worth a careful 
perusal.a__a_"Coleridge, p. 211, sq. 
103. The mention of Corinth is an anachronism, as that city was called 
Ephyre before its capture by the Dorians. But Velleius, vol. i. p. 3, 
well observes, that the poet would naturally speak of various towns and 
cities by the names by which they were known in his own time. 
104. 
a_oeAdam, the goodliest man of men since born, 
His sons, the fairest of her daughters Eve.a__ 
a_"a_oeParadise Lost,a__ iv. 323. 
105. a_"_A_setesa__ tomb._ Monuments were often built on the sea-coast, and 
of a considerable height, so as to serve as watch-towers or land marks. 
See my notes to my prose translations of the a_oeOdyssey,a__ ii. p. 21, or 
on Eur. a_oeAlcest.a__ vol. i. p. 240. 
106. a_"_Zeleia,_ another name for Lycia. The inhabitants were greatly 
devoted to the worship of Apollo. See Muller, a_oeDorians,a__ vol. i. p. 
248. 
107. a_"_Barbarous tongues._ a_oeVarious as were the dialects of the 
Greeksa_"and these differences existed not only between the several 
tribes, but even between neighbouring citiesa_"they yet acknowledged in 
their language that they formed but one nation were but branches of the 
same family. Homer has a__men of other tongues:a__ and yet Homer had no 
general name for the Greek nation.a__a_"Heeren, a_oeAncient Greece,a__ Section 
vii. p. 107, sq. 
108. 
_The cranes._ 
a_oeMarking the tracts of air, the clamorous cranes 
Wheel their due flight in varied ranks descried: 
And each with outstretcha__d neck his rank maintains, 
In marshalla__d order through tha__ ethereal void.a__ 
Lorenzo de Medici, in Roscoea__s Life, Appendix. 
See Carya__s Dante: a_oeHell,a__ canto v. 
109. 
_Silent, breathing rage._ 
a_oeThus they, 
Breathing united force with fixed thought, 
Moved on in silence.a__ 
a_oeParadise Lost,a__ book i. 559. 
110. 
a_oeAs when some peasant in a bushy brake 
Has with unwary footing pressa__d a snake; 
He starts aside, astonisha__d, when he spies 
His rising crest, blue neck, and rolling eyesa__ 
Drydena__s Virgil, ii. 510. 
111. Dysparis, i.e. unlucky, ill fated, Paris. This alludes to the 
evils which resulted from his having been brought up, despite the omens 
which attended his birth. 
112. The following scene, in which Homer has contrived to introduce so 
brilliant a sketch of the Grecian warriors, has been imitated by 
Euripides, who in his a_oePhoenissaea__ represents Antigone surveying the 
opposing champions from a high tower, while the paedagogus describes 
their insignia and details their histories. 
113. a_"_No wonder,_ &c. Zeuxis, the celebrated artist, is said to have 
appended these lines to his picture of Helen, as a motto. Valer Max. 
iii. 7. 
114. The early epic was largely occupied with the exploits and 
sufferings of women, or heroines, the wives and daughters of the 
Grecian heroes. A nation of courageous, hardy, indefatigable women, 
dwelling apart from men, permitting only a short temporary intercourse, 
for the purpose of renovating their numbers, burning out their right 
breast with a view of enabling themselves to draw the bow freely; this 
was at once a general type, stimulating to the fancy of the poet, and a 
theme eminently popular with his hearers. We find these warlike females 
constantly reappearing in the ancient poems, and universally accepted 
as past realities in the Iliad. When Priam wishes to illustrate 
emphatically the most numerous host in which he ever found himself 
included, he tells us that it was assembled in Phrygia, on the banks of 
the Sangarius, for the purpose of resisting the formidable Amazons. 
When Bellerophon is to be employed in a deadly and perilous 
undertaking, by those who prudently wished to procure his death, he is 
despatched against the Amazons.a_"Grote, vol. i p. 289. 
115. a_"_Antenor,_ like A_neas, had always been favourable to the 
restoration of Helen. Liv 1. 2. 
116. 
a_oeHis laba__ring heart with sudden rapture seized 
He pausa__d, and on the ground in silence gazed. 
Unskilla__d and uninspired he seems to stand, 
Nor lifts the eye, nor graceful moves the hand: 
Then, while the chiefs in still attention hung, 
Pours the full tide of eloquence along; 
While from his lips the melting torrent flows, 
Soft as the fleeces of descending snows. 
Now stronger notes engage the listening crowd, 
Louder the accents rise, and yet more loud, 
Like thunders rolling from a distant cloud.a__ 
Merricka__s a_oeTryphiodorus,a__ 148, 99. 
117. Duport, a_oeGnomol. Homer,a__ p. 20, well observes that this comparison 
may also be sarcastically applied to the _frigid_ style of oratory. It, 
of course, here merely denotes the ready fluency of Ulysses. 
118. a_"_Her brothersa__ doom._ They perished in combat with Lynceus and 
Idas, whilst besieging Sparta. See Hygin. Poet Astr. 32, 22. Virgil and 
others, however, make them share immortality by turns. 
119. Idreus was the arm-bearer and charioteer of king Priam, slain 
during this war. Cf. A_n, vi. 487. 
120. a_"_Scaeaa__s gates,_ rather _Scaean gates,_ _i.e._ the left-hand 
gates. 
121. This was customary in all sacrifices. Hence we find Iras 
descending to cut off the hair of Dido, before which she could not 
expire. 
122. 
a_"_Nor pierced._ 
a_oeThis said, his feeble hand a java__lin threw, 
Which, flutta__ring, seemed to loiter as it flew, 
Just, and but barely, to the mark it held, 
And faintly tinkled on the brazen shield.a__ 
Drydena__s Virgil, ii. 742. 
123. 
_Reveala__d the queen._ 
a_oeThus having said, she turna__d and made appear 
Her neck refulgent and dishevella__d hair, 
Which, flowing from her shoulders, reacha__d the ground, 
And widely spread ambrosial scents around. 
In length of train descends her sweeping gown; 
And, by her graceful walk, the queen of love is known.a__ 
Drydena__s Virgil, i. 556. 
124. a_"_Cranaea__s isle, i.e._ Athens. See the a_oeSchol.a__ and Albertia__s 
a_oeHesychius,a__ vol. ii. p. 338. This name was derived from one of its 
early kings, Cranaus. 
125. a_"_The martial maid._ In the original, a_oeMinerva Alalcomeneis,a__ 
_i.e. the defender,_ so called from her temple at Alalcomene in 
Boeotia. 
126. a_oeAnything for a quiet life!a__ 
127. a_"_Argos._ The worship of Juno at Argos was very celebrated in 
ancient times, and she was regarded as the patron deity of that city. 
Apul. Met., vi. p. 453; Servius on Virg. A_n., i. 28. 
128. 
a_"_A wife and sister._ 
a_oeBut I, who walk in awful state above 
The majesty of heava__n, the sister-wife of Jove.a__ 
Drydena__s a_oeVirgil,a__ i. 70. 
So Apuleius, _l. c._ speaks of her as a_oeJovis germana et conjux, and so 
Horace, Od. iii. 3, 64, a_oeconjuge me Jovis et sorore.a__ 
129. 
a_oeThither came Uriel, gleaming through the even 
On a sunbeam, swift as a shooting star 
In autumn thwarts the night, when vapours fired 
Impress the air, and shows the mariner 
From what point of his compass to beware 
Impetuous winds.a__ 
a_"a_oeParadise Lost,a__ iv. 555. 
130. a_"_A_sepusa__ flood._ A river of Mysia, rising from Mount Cotyius, in 
the southern part of the chain of Ida. 
131. a_"_Zelia,_ a town of Troas, at the foot of Ida. 
132. a_"_Podaleirius_ and _Machaon_ are the leeches of the Grecian army, 
highly prized and consulted by all the wounded chiefs. Their medical 
renown was further prolonged in the subsequent poem of Arktinus, the 
Iliou Persis, wherein the one was represented as unrivalled in surgical 
operations, the other as sagacious in detecting and appreciating morbid 
symptoms. It was Podaleirius who first noticed the glaring eyes and 
disturbed deportment which preceded the suicide of Ajax. 
a_oeGalen appears uncertain whether Asklepius (as well as Dionysus) was 
originally a god, or whether he was first a man and then became 
afterwards a god; but Apollodorus professed to fix the exact date of 
his apotheosis. Throughout all the historical ages the descendants of 
Asklepius were numerous and widely diffused. The many families or 
gentes, called Asklepiads, who devoted themselves to the study and 
practice of medicine, and who principally dwelt near the temples of 
Asklepius, whither sick and suffering men came to obtain reliefa_"all 
recognized the god not merely as the object of their common worship, 
but also as their actual progenitor.a__a_"Grote vol. i. p. 248. 
133. 
a_oeThe plant she bruises with a stone, and stands 
Tempering the juice between her ivory hands 
This oa__er her breast she sheds with sovereign art 
And bathes with gentle touch the wounded part 
The wound such virtue from the juice derives, 
At once the blood is stancha__d, the youth revives.a__ 
a_oeOrlando Furioso,a__ book 1. 
134. 
a_"_Well might I wish._ 
a_oeWould heava__n (said he) my strength and youth recall, 
Such as I was beneath Praenestea__s walla_" 
Then when I made the foremost foes retire, 
And set whole heaps of conquera__d shields on fire; 
When Herilus in single fight I slew, 
Whom with three lives Feronia did endue.a__ 
Drydena__s Virgil, viii. 742. 
135. a_"_Sthenelus,_ a son of Capaneus, one of the Epigoni. He was one of 
the suitors of Helen, and is said to have been one of those who entered 
Troy inside the wooden horse. 
136. a_"_Forwarna__d the horrors._ The same portent has already been 
mentioned. To this day, modern nations are not wholly free from this 
superstition. 
137. a_"_Sevenfold city,_ Boeotian Thebes, which had seven gates. 
138. 
a_"_As when the winds._ 
a_oeThus, when a black-browa__d gust begins to rise, 
White foam at first on the curla__d ocean fries; 
Then roars the main, the billows mount the skies, 
Till, by the fury of the storm full blown, 
The muddy billow oa__er the clouds is thrown.a__ 
Drydena__s Virgil, vii. 736. 
139. 
a_oeStood 
Like Teneriffe or Atlas unremoved; 
His stature reacha__d the sky.a__ 
a_"a_oeParadise Lost,a__ iv. 986. 
140. 
The Abantes seem to have been of Thracian origin. 
141. I may, once for all, remark that Homer is most anatomically 
correct as to the parts of the body in which a wound would be 
immediately mortal. 
142. 
a_"_A_nus,_ a fountain almost proverbial for its coldness. 
143. 
Compare Tasso, Gier. Lib., xx. 7: 
a_oeNuovo favor del cielo in lui niluce 
E a__l fa grande, et angusto oltre il costume. 
Gla__ empie da__ honor la faccia, e vi riduce 
Di giovinezza il bel purpureo lume.a__ 
144. 
a_oeOr deluges, descending on the plains, 
Sweep oa__er the yellow year, destroy the pains 
Of laba__ring oxen, and the peasanta__s gains; 
Uproot the forest oaks, and bear away 
Flocks, folds, and trees, an undistinguisha__d prey.a__ 
Drydena__s Virgil ii. 408. 
145. 
a_"_From mortal mists._ 
a_oeBut to nobler sights 
Michael from Adama__s eyes the film removed.a__ 
a_oeParadise Lost,a__ xi. 411. 
146. 
a_"_The race of those._ 
a_oeA pair of coursers, born of heava__nly breed, 
Who from their nostrils breathed ethereal fire; 
Whom Circe stole from her celestial sire, 
By substituting mares produced on earth, 
Whose wombs conceived a more than mortal birth. 
Drydena__s Virgil, vii. 386, sqq. 
147. 
The belief in the existence of men of larger stature in earlier times, 
is by no means confined to Homer. 
148. 
a_"_Such stream, i.e._ the _ichor,_ or blood of the gods. 
a_oeA stream of necta__rous humour issuing flowa__d, 
Sanguine, such as celestial spirits may bleed.a__ 
a_oeParadise Lost,a__ vi. 339. 
149. 
This was during the wars with the Titans. 
150. 
a_"_Amphitryona__s son,_ Hercules, born to Jove by Alcmena, the wife of Amphitryon. 
151. a_"_A_giale_ daughter of Adrastus. The Cyclic poets (See Anthona__s 
Lempriere, _s. v._) assert Venus incited her to infidelity, in revenge 
for the wound she had received from her husband. 
152. a_"_Pherae,_ a town of Pelasgiotis, in Thessaly. 
153. a_"_Tlepolemus,_ son of Hercules and Astyochia. Having left his 
native country, Argos, in consequence of the accidental murder of 
Liscymnius, he was commanded by an oracle to retire to Rhodes. Here he 
was chosen king, and accompanied the Trojan expedition. After his 
death, certain games were instituted at Rhodes in his honour, the 
victors being rewarded with crowns of poplar. 
154. These heroesa__ names have since passed into a kind of proverb, 
designating the _oi polloi_ or mob. 
155. 
a_"_Spontaneous open._ 
a_oeVeila__d with his gorgeous wings, upspringing light 
Flew through the midst of heaven; tha__ angelic quires, 
On each hand parting, to his speed gave way 
Through all tha__ empyreal road; till at the gate 
Of heaven arrived, the gate self-opena__d wide, 
On golden hinges turning.a__ 
a_"a_oeParadise Lost,a__ v. 250. 
156. 
a_oeTill Morn, 
Waked by the circling Hours, with rosy hand 
Unbarra__d the gates of light.a__ 
a_"a_oeParadise Lost,a__ vi, 2. 
157. a_"_Far as a shepherd._ a_oeWith what majesty and pomp does Homer exalt 
his deities! He here measures the leap of the horses by the extent of 
the world. And who is there, that, considering the exceeding greatness 
of the space would not with reason cry out that a__If the steeds of the 
deity were to take a second leap, the world would want room for 
ita__?a__a_"Longinus, Section 8. 
158. a_oeNo trumpets, or any other instruments of sound, are used in the 
Homeric action itself; but the trumpet was known, and is introduced for 
the purpose of illustration as employed in war. Hence arose the value 
of a loud voice in a commander; Stentor was an indispensable officer... 
In the early Saracen campaigns frequent mention is made of the service 
rendered by men of uncommonly strong voices; the battle of Honain was 
restored by the shouts and menaces of Abbas, the uncle of Mohammed,a__ 
&c.a_"Coleridge, p. 213. 
159. 
a_oeLong had the wava__ring god the war delaya__d, 
While Greece and Troy alternate owna__d his aid.a__ 
Merricka__s a_oeTryphiodorus,a__ vi. 761, sq. 
160. a_"_Paeon_ seems to have been to the gods, what Podaleirius and 
Machaon were to the Grecian heroes. 
161. a_"_Arisbe,_ a colony of the Mitylenaeans in Troas. 
162. a_"_Pedasus,_ a town near Pylos. 
163. a_"_Rich heaps of brass._ a_oeThe halls of Alkinous and Menelaus 
glitter with gold, copper, and electrum; while large stocks of yet 
unemployed metala_"gold, copper, and iron are stored up in the 
treasure-chamber of Odysseus and other chiefs. Coined money is unknown 
in the Homeric agea_"the trade carried on being one of barter. In 
reference also to the metals, it deserves to be remarked, that the 
Homeric descriptions universally suppose copper, and not iron, to be 
employed for arms, both offensive and defensive. By what process the 
copper was tempered and hardened, so as to serve the purpose of the 
warrior, we do not know; but the use of iron for these objects belongs 
to a later age.a__a_"Grote, vol. ii. p. 142. 
164. a_"_Oh impotent,_ &c. a_oeIn battle, quarter seems never to have been 
given, except with a view to the ransom of the prisoner. Agamemnon 
reproaches Menelaus with unmanly softness, when he is on the point of 
sparing a fallen enemy, and himself puts the suppliant to the 
sword.a__a_"Thirlwall, vol. i. p. 181 
165. 
a_oeThe ruthless steel, impatient of delay, 
Forbade the sire to linger out the day. 
It struck the bending father to the earth, 
And cropt the wailing infant at the birth. 
Can innocents the rage of parties know, 
And they who nea__er offended find a foe?a__ 
Rowea__s Lucan, bk. ii. 
166. 
a_oeMeantime the Trojan dames, oppressa__d with woe, 
To Pallasa__ fane in long procession go, 
In hopes to reconcile their heava__nly foe: 
They weep; they beat their breasts; they rend their hair, 
And rich embroidera__d vests for presents bear.a__ 
Drydena__s Virgil, i. 670 
167. The manner in which this episode is introduced, is well 
illustrated by the following remarks of Mure, vol. i. p.298: a_oeThe 
poeta__s method of introducing his episode, also, illustrates in a 
curious manner his tact in the dramatic department of his art. Where, 
for example, one or more heroes are despatched on some commission, to 
be executed at a certain distance of time or place, the fulfilment of 
this task is not, as a general rule, immediately described. A certain 
interval is allowed them for reaching the appointed scene of action, 
which interval is dramatised, as it were, either by a temporary 
continuation of the previous narrative, or by fixing attention for a 
while on some new transaction, at the close of which the further 
account of the mission is resumed.a__ 
168. a_"_With tablets sealed._ These probably were only devices of a 
hieroglyphical character. Whether writing was known in the Homeric 
times is utterly uncertain. See Grote, vol ii. p. 192, sqq. 
169. a_"_Solymaean crew,_ a people of Lycia. 
170. From this a_oemelancholy madnessa__ of Bellerophon, hypochondria 
received the name of a_oeMorbus Bellerophonteus.a__ See my notes in my prose 
translation, p. 112. The a_oeAleian field,a__ _i.e._ a_oethe plain of 
wandering,a__ was situated between the rivers Pyramus and Pinarus, in 
Cilicia. 
171. a_"_His own, of gold._ This bad bargain has passed into a common 
proverb. See Aulus Gellius, ii, 23. 
172. 
a_"_Scaean, i e._ left hand. 
173. 
a_"_In fifty chambers._ 
a_oeThe fifty nuptial beds, (such hopes had he, 
So large a promise of a progeny,) 
The ports of plated gold, and hung with spoils.a__ 
Drydena__s Virgil, ii.658 
174. a_"_O would kind earth,_ &c. a_oeIt is apparently a sudden, irregular 
burst of popular indignation to which Hector alludes, when he regrets 
that the Trojans had not spirit enough to cover Paris with a mantle of 
stones. This, however, was also one of the ordinary formal modes of 
punishment for great public offences. It may have been originally 
connected with the same feelinga_"the desire of avoiding the pollution of 
bloodsheda_"which seems to have suggested the practice of burying 
prisoners alive, with a scantling of food by their side. Though Homer 
makes no mention of this horrible usage, the example of the Roman 
Vestals affords reasons for believing that, in ascribing it to the 
heroic ages, Sophocles followed an authentic tradition.a__a_"Thirlwalla__s 
Greece, vol. i. p. 171, sq. 
175. a_"_Parisa__ lofty dome._ a_oeWith respect to the private dwellings, 
which are oftenest described, the poeta__s language barely enables us to 
form a general notion of their ordinary plan, and affords no conception 
of the style which prevailed in them or of their effect on the eye. It 
seems indeed probable, from the manner in which he dwells on their 
metallic ornaments that the higher beauty of proportion was but little 
required or understood, and it is, perhaps, strength and convenience, 
rather than elegance, that he means to commend, in speaking of the fair 
house which Paris had built for himself with the aid of the most 
skilful masons of Troy.a__a_"Thirlwalla__s Greece, vol. i. p. 231. 
176. 
a_"_The wanton courser._ 
a_oeCome destrier, che da le regie stalle 
Ove a la__usa de la__arme si riserba, 
Fugge, e libero al fiu per largo calle 
Va tragla__ armenti, o al fiume usato, o a la__herba.a__ 
Gier, Lib. ix. 75. 
177. a_"_Casque._ The original word is stephanae, about the meaning of 
which there is some little doubt. Some take it for a different kind of 
cap or helmet, others for the rim, others for the cone, of the helmet. 
178. 
a_"_Athenian maid:_ Minerva. 
179. 
a_"_Celadon,_ a river of Elis. 
180. a_"_Oileus, i.e._ Ajax, the son of Oileus, in contradistinction to 
Ajax, son of Telamon. 
181. a_"_In the generala__s helm._ It was customary to put the lots into a 
helmet, in which they were well shaken up; each man then took his 
choice. 
182. a_"_God of Thrace._ Mars, or Mavors, according to his Thracian 
epithet. Hence a_oeMavortia Moenia.a__ 
183. 
a_"_Grimly he smiled._ 
a_oeAnd death 
Grinna__d horribly a ghastly smile.a__ 
a_"a_oeParadise Lost,a__ ii. 845. 
a_oeThere Mavors stands 
Grinning with ghastly feature.a__ 
a_"Careya__s Dante: Hell, v. 
184. 
a_oeSete o guerrieri, incomincio Pindoro, 
Con pari honor di pari ambo possenti, 
Dunque cessi la pugna, e non sian rotte 
Le ragioni, e a__l riposo, e de la notte.a__ 
a_"Gier. Lib. vi. 51. 
185. It was an ancient style of compliment to give a larger portion of 
food to the conqueror, or person to whom respect was to be shown. See 
Virg. A_n. viii. 181. Thus Benjamin was honoured with a a_oedouble 
portion.a__ Gen. xliii. 34. 
186. a_"_Embattled walls._ a_oeAnother essential basis of mechanical unity 
in the poem is the construction of the rampart. This takes place in the 
seventh book. The reason ascribed for the glaring improbability that 
the Greeks should have left their camp and fleet unfortified during 
nine years, in the midst of a hostile country, is a purely poetical 
one: a__So long as Achilles fought, the terror of his name sufficed to 
keep every foe at a distance.a__ The disasters consequent on his 
secession first led to the necessity of other means of protection. 
Accordingly, in the battles previous to the eighth book, no allusion 
occurs to a rampart; in all those which follow it forms a prominent 
feature. Here, then, in the anomaly as in the propriety of the Iliad, 
the destiny of Achilles, or rather this peculiar crisis of it, forms 
the pervading bond of connexion to the whole poem.a__a_"Mure, vol. i., p. 
257. 
187. 
a_"_What cause of fear,_ &c. 
a_oeSeest thou not this? Or do we fear in vain 
Thy boasted thunders, and thy thoughtless reign?a__ 
Drydena__s Virgil, iv. 304. 
188. a_"_In exchange._ These lines are referred to by Theophilus, the 
Roman lawyer, iii. tit. xxiii. Section 1, as exhibiting the most 
ancient mention of barter. 
189. a_oeA similar bond of connexion, in the military details of the 
narrative, is the decree issued by Jupiter, at the commencement of the 
eighth book, against any further interference of the gods in the 
battles. In the opening of the twentieth book this interdict is 
withdrawn. During the twelve intermediate books it is kept steadily in 
view. No interposition takes place but on the part of the specially 
authorised agents of Jove, or on that of one or two contumacious 
deities, described as boldly setting his commands at defiance, but 
checked and reprimanded for their disobedience; while the other divine 
warriors, who in the previous and subsequent cantos are so active in 
support of their favourite heroes, repeatedly allude to the supreme 
edict as the cause of their present inactivity.a__a_"Mure, vol. i. p 257. 
See however, Muller, a_oeGreek Literature,a__ ch. v. Section 6, and Grote, 
vol. ii. p. 252. 
190. 
a_oeAs far removed from God and light of heaven, 
As from the centre thrice to tha__ utmost pole.a__ 
a_"a_oeParadise Lost.a__ 
a_oeE quanto e da le stelle al basso inferno, 
Tanto e piu in su de la stellata speraa__ 
a_"Gier. Lib. i. 7. 
a_oeSome of the epithets which Homer applies to the heavens seem to imply 
that he considered it as a solid vault of metal. But it is not 
necessary to construe these epithets so literally, nor to draw any such 
inference from his description of Atlas, who holds the lofty pillars 
which keep earth and heaven asunder. Yet it would seem, from the manner 
in which the height of heaven is compared with the depth of Tartarus, 
that the region of light was thought to have certain bounds. The summit 
of the Thessalian Olympus was regarded as the highest point on the 
earth, and it is not always carefully distinguished from the aerian 
regions above The idea of a seat of the godsa_"perhaps derived from a 
more ancient tradition, in which it was not attached to any 
geographical sitea_"seems to be indistinctly blended in the poeta__s mind 
with that of the real mountain.a__a_"Thirlwalla__s Greece, vol. i. p. 217, 
sq. 
191. 
a_oeNow lately heava__n, earth, another world 
Hung ea__er my realm, linka__d in a golden chain 
To that side heava__n.a__ 
a_"a_oeParadise Lost,a__ ii. 1004. 
192. 
a_"_His golden scales._ 
a_oeJove now, sole arbiter of peace and war, 
Held forth the fatal balance from afar: 
Each host he weighs; by turns they both prevail, 
Till Troy descending fixa__d the doubtful scale.a__ 
Merricka__s Tryphiodorus, v 687, sqq. 
a_oeTha__ Eternal, to prevent such horrid fray, 
Hung forth in heava__n his golden scales, 
Wherein all things created first he weighed; 
The pendulous round earth, with balanced air 
In counterpoise; now ponders all events, 
Battles and realms. In these he puts two weights, 
The sequel each of parting and of fight: 
The latter quick up flew, and kicka__d the beam.a__ 
a_oeParadise Lost,a__ iv. 496. 
193. 
a_"_And now,_ &c. 
a_oeAnd now all heaven 
Had gone to wrack, with ruin overspread; 
Had not tha__ Almighty Father, where he sits 
... foreseen.a__ 
a_"a_oeParadise Lost,a__ vi. 669. 
194. a_"_Gerenian Nestor._ The epithet _Gerenian_ either refers to the 
name of a place in which Nestor was educated, or merely signifies 
honoured, revered. See Schol. Venet. in II. B. 336; Strabo, viii. p. 
340. 
195. a_"_A_gae, Helice._ Both these towns were conspicuous for their 
worship of Neptune. 
196. 
a_"_As full blown,_ &c. 
a_oeIl suo Lesbia quasi bel fior succiso, 
E in atto si gentil languir tremanti 
Gla__ occhi, e cader siu a__l tergo il collo mira.a__ 
Gier. Lib. ix. 85. 
197. 
a_"_Ungrateful,_ because the cause in which they were engaged was 
unjust. 
a_oeStruck by the laba__ring priestsa__ uplifted hands 
The victims fall: to heava__n they make their praya__r, 
The curling vapours load the ambient air. 
But vain their toil: the powa__rs who rule the skies 
Averse beheld the ungrateful sacrifice.a__ 
Merricka__s Tryphiodorus, vi. 527, sqq. 
198. 
a_oeAs when about the silver moon, when aire is free from winde, 
And stars shine cleare, to whose sweet beams high prospects on the brows 
Of all steepe hills and pinnacles thrust up themselves for shows, 
And even the lowly valleys joy to glitter in their sight; 
When the unmeasured firmament bursts to disclose her light, 
And all the signs in heaven are seene, that glad the shepherda__s heart.a__ 
Chapman. 
199. This flight of the Greeks, according to Buttmann, Lexil. p. 358, 
was not a supernatural flight caused by the gods, but a_oea great and 
general one, caused by Hector and the Trojans, but with the approval of 
Jove.a__ 
200. Grote, vol. ii. p. 91, after noticing the modest calmness and 
respect with which Nestor addresses Agamemnon, observes, a_oeThe Homeric 
Council is a purely consultative body, assembled not with any power of 
peremptorily arresting mischievous resolves of the king, but solely for 
his information and guidance.a__ 
201. In the heroic times, it is not unfrequent for the king to receive 
presents to purchase freedom from his wrath, or immunity from his 
exactions. Such gifts gradually became regular, and formed the income 
of the German, (Tacit. Germ. Section 15) Persian, (Herodot. iii.89), 
and other kings. So, too, in the middle ages, a__The feudal aids are the 
beginning of taxation, of which they for a long time answered the 
purpose.a__ (Hallam, Middle Ages, ch. x. pt. 1, p. 189) This fact frees 
Achilles from the apparent charge of sordidness. Plato, however, (De 
Rep. vi. 4), says, a_oeWe cannot commend Phoenix, the tutor of Achilles, 
as if he spoke correctly, when counselling him to accept of presents 
and assist the Greeks, but, without presents, not to desist from his 
wrath, nor again, should we commend Achilles himself, or approve of his 
being so covetous as to receive presents from Agamemnon,a__ &c. 
202. It may be observed, that, brief as is the mention of Briseis in 
the Iliad, and small the part she playsa_"what little is said is 
pre-eminently calculated to enhance her fitness to be the bride of 
Achilles. Purity, and retiring delicacy, are features well contrasted 
with the rough, but tender disposition of the hero. 
203. a_"_Laodice._ Iphianassa, or Iphigenia, is not mentioned by Homer, 
among the daughters of Agamemnon. 
204. a_oeAgamemnon, when he offers to transfer to Achilles seven towns 
inhabited by wealthy husbandmen, who would enrich their lord by 
presents and tribute, seems likewise to assume rather a property in 
them, than an authority over them. And the same thing may be intimated 
when it is said that Peleus bestowed a great people, the Dolopes of 
Phthia, on Phoenix.a__a_"Thirlwalla__s Greece, vol. i Section 6, p. 162, 
note. 
205. a_"_Pray in deep silence._ Rather: a_oeuse well-omened words;a__ or, as 
Kennedy has explained it, a_oeAbstain from expressions unsuitable to the 
solemnity of the occasion, which, by offending the god, might defeat 
the object of their supplications.a__ 
206. a_"_Purest hands._ This is one of the most ancient superstitions 
respecting prayer, and one founded as much in nature as in tradition. 
207. It must be recollected, that the war at Troy was not a settled 
siege, and that many of the chieftains busied themselves in piratical 
expeditions about its neighborhood. Such a one was that of which 
Achilles now speaks. From the following verses, it is evident that 
fruits of these maraudings went to the common support of the 
expedition, and not to the successful plunderer. 
208. a_"_Pthia,_ the capital of Achillesa__ Thessalian domains. 
209. a_"_Orchomenian town._ The topography of Orchomenus, in Boeotia, 
a_oesituated,a__ as it was, a_oeon the northern bank of the lake A_pais, which 
receives not only the river Cephisus from the valleys of Phocis, but 
also other rivers from Parnassus and Helicona__ (Grote, vol. p. 181), was 
a sufficient reason for its prosperity and decay. a_oeAs long as the 
channels of these waters were diligently watched and kept clear, a 
large portion of the lake was in the condition of alluvial land, 
pre-eminently rich and fertile. But when the channels came to be either 
neglected, or designedly choked up by an enemy, the water accumulated 
in such a degree as to occupy the soil of more than one ancient islet, 
and to occasion the change of the site of Orchomenus itself from the 
plain to the declivity of Mount Hyphanteion.a__ (Ibid.) 
210. The phrase a_oehundred gates,a__ &c., seems to be merely expressive of 
a great number. See notes to my prose translation, p. 162. 
211. Compare the following pretty lines of Quintus Calaber (Dycea__s 
Select Translations, p 88).a_" 
a_oeMany gifts he gave, and oa__er 
Dolopia bade me rule; thee in his arms 
He brought an infant, on my bosom laid 
The precious charge, and anxiously enjoina__d 
That I should rear thee as my own with all 
A parenta__s love. I faila__d not in my trust 
And oft, while round my neck thy hands were locka__d, 
From thy sweet lips the half articulate sound 
Of Father came; and oft, as children use, 
Mewling and puking didst thou drench my tunic.a__ 
a_oeThis description,a__ observes my learned friend (notes, p. 121) a_oeis 
taken from the passage of Homer, II ix, in translating which, Pope, 
with that squeamish, artificial taste, which distinguished the age of 
Anne, omits the natural (and, let me add, affecting) circumstance.a__ 
a_oeAnd the wine 
Held to thy lips, and many a time in fits 
Of infant frowardness the purple juice 
Rejecting thou hast deluged all my vest, 
And filla__d my bosom.a__ 
a_"Cowper. 
212. a_"_Where Calydon._ For a good sketch of the story of Meleager, too 
long to be inserted here, see Grote, vol. i. p. 195, sqq.; and for the 
authorities, see my notes to the prose translation, p. 166. 
213. a_oe_Gifts can conquer_a__a_"It is well observed by Bishop Thirlwall, 
a_oeGreece,a__ vol. i. p, 180, that the law of honour among the Greeks did 
not compel them to treasure up in their memory the offensive language 
which might be addressed to them by a passionate adversary, nor to 
conceive that it left a stain which could only be washed away by blood. 
Even for real and deep injuries they were commonly willing to accept a 
pecuniary compensation.a__ 
214. a_oeThe boon of sleep.a__a_"Milton 
215. 
a_oeAll else of naturea__s common gift partake: 
Unhappy Dido was alone awake.a__ 
a_"Drydena__s Virgil, iv. 767. 
216. 
a_"_The king of Crete:_ Idomeneus. 
217. a_"_Soft wool within, i e._ a kind of woollen stuffing, pressed in 
between the straps, to protect the head, and make the helmet fit close. 
218. a_oeAll the circumstances of this actiona_"the night, Rhesus buried in 
a profound sleep, and Diomede with the sword in his hand hanging over 
the head of that princea_"furnished Homer with the idea of this fiction, 
which represents Rhesus lying fast asleep, and, as it were, beholding 
his enemy in a dream, plunging the sword into his bosom. This image is 
very natural; for a man in his condition awakes no farther than to see 
confusedly what environs him, and to think it not a reality but a 
dream.a__a_"Pope. 
a_oeTherea__s one did laugh in his sleep, and one crya__d murder; 
They waka__d each other.a__ 
a_"_Macbeth._ 
219. 
a_oeAurora now had left her saffron bed, 
And beams of early light the heavens oa__erspread.a__ 
Drydena__s Virgil, iv. 639 
220. a_"_Red drops of blood._ a_oeThis phenomenon, if a mere fruit of the 
poeta__s imagination, might seem arbitrary or far-fetched. It is one, 
however, of ascertained reality, and of no uncommon occurrence in the 
climate of Greece.a__a_"Mure, i p. 493. Cf. Tasso, Gier. Lib. ix. 15: 
a_oeLa terra in vece del notturno gelo 
Bagnan rugiade tepide, e sanguigne.a__ 
221. 
a_oeNo thought of flight, 
None of retreat, no unbecoming deed 
That argued fear.a__ 
a_"a_oeParadise Lost,a__ vi. 236. 
222. a_"_One of love._ Although a bastard brother received only a small 
portion of the inheritance, he was commonly very well treated. Priam 
appears to be the only one of whom polygamy is directly asserted in the 
Iliad. Grote, vol. ii. p. 114, note. 
223. 
a_oeCircled with foes as when a packe of bloodie jackals cling 
About a goodly palmed hart, hurt with a huntera__s bow 
Whose escape his nimble feet insure, whilst his warm blood doth flow, 
And his light knees have power to move: but (maistred by his wound) 
Embost within a shady hill, the jackals charge him round, 
And teare his flesha_"when instantly fortune sends in the powers 
Of some sterne lion, with whose sighte they flie and he devours. 
So they around Ulysses prest.a__ 
a_"Chapman. 
224. 
a_"_Simois, railing,_ &c. 
a_oeIn those bloody fields 
Where Simois rolls the bodies and the shields 
Of heroes.a__ 
a_"Drydena__s Virgil, i. 142. 
225. 
a_oeWhere yon disordera__d heap of ruin lies, 
Stones rent from stones,a_"where clouds of dust arise,a_" 
Amid that smother, Neptune holds his place, 
Below the walla__s foundation drives his mace, 
And heaves the building from the solid base.a__ 
Drydena__s Virgil, ii. 825. 
226. 
a_"_Why boast we._ 
a_oeWherefore do I assume 
These royalties and not refuse to reign, 
Refusing to accept as great a share 
Of hazard as of honour, due alike to him 
Who reigns, and so much to him due 
Of hazard more, as he above the rest 
High honoura__d sits.a__ 
a_"a_oeParadise Lost,a__ ii. 450. 
227. 
a_"_Each equal weight._ 
a_oeLong time in even scale 
The battle hung.a__ 
a_"a_oeParadise Lost,a__ vi. 245. 
228. 
a_oeHe on his impious foes right onward drove, 
_Gloomy as night._a__ 
a_"a_oeParadise Lost,a__ vi. 831 
229. a_"_Renowna__d for justice and for length of days,_ Arrian. de Exp. 
Alex. iv. p. 239, also speaks of the independence of these people, 
which he regards as the result of their poverty and uprightness. Some 
authors have regarded the phrase a_oeHippomolgian,a__ _i.e._ a_oemilking their 
mares,a__ as an epithet applicable to numerous tribes, since the oldest 
of the Samatian nomads made their maresa__ milk one of their chief 
articles of diet. The epithet abion or abion, in this passage, has 
occasioned much discussion. It may mean, according as we read it, 
either a_oelong-lived,a__ or a_oebowless,a__ the latter epithet indicating that 
they did not depend upon archery for subsistence. 
230. 
Compare Chapmana__s quaint, bold verses:a_" 
a_oeAnd as a round piece of a rocke, which with a wintera__s flood 
Is from his top torn, when a shoure poured from a bursten cloud, 
Hath broke the naturall band it had within the roughftey rock, 
Flies jumping all adourne the woods, resounding everie shocke, 
And on, uncheckt, it headlong leaps till in a plaine it stay, 
And then (thoa__ never so impelled), it stirs not any way:a_" 
So Hector,a_"a__ 
231. This book forms a most agreeable interruption to The continuous 
round of battles, which occupy the latter part of the Iliad. It is as 
well to observe, that the sameness of these scenes renders many notes 
unnecessary. 
232. 
a_"_Who to Tydeus owes, i.e._ Diomed. 
233. 
Compare Tasso:a_" 
Teneri sdegni, e placide, e tranquille 
Repulse, e cari vezzi, e liete paci, 
Sorrisi, parolette, e dolci stille 
Di pianto, e sospir tronchi, e molli baci.a__ 
Gier. Lib. xvi. 25 
234. 
Compare the description of the dwelling of Sleep in Orlando Furioso, 
bk. vi. 
235. 
a_oeTwice seven, the charming daughters of the maina_" 
Around my person wait, and bear my train: 
Succeed my wish, and second my design, 
The fairest, Deiopeia, shall be thine.a__ 
Drydena__s Virgil, A_n. i. 107, seq. 
236. a_"_And Minos._ a_oeBy Homer, Minos is described as the son of Jupiter, 
and of the daughter of Phoenix, whom all succeeding authors name 
Europa; and he is thus carried back into the remotest period of Cretan 
antiquity known to the poet, apparently as a native hero, Illustrious 
enough for a divine parentage, and too ancient to allow his descent to 
be traced to any other source. But in a genealogy recorded by later 
writers, he is likewise the adopted son of Asterius, as descendant of 
Dorus, the son of Helen, and is thus connected with a colony said to 
have been led into Creta by Tentamus, or Tectamus, son of Dorus, who is 
related either to have crossed over from Thessaly, or to have embarked 
at Malea after having led his followers by land into 
Laconia.a__a_"Thirlwall, p. 136, seq. 
237. Milton has emulated this passage, in describing the couch of our 
first parents:a_" 
a_oeUnderneath the violet, 
Crocus, and hyacinth with rich inlay, 
a__Broidera__d the ground.a__ 
a_"a_oeParadise Lost,a__ iv. 700. 
238. 
a_"_He lies protected,_ 
a_oeForthwith on all sides to his aid was run 
By angels many and strong, who interposa__d 
Defence, while others bore him on their shields 
Back to his chariot, where it stood retira__d 
From off the files of war; there they him laid, 
Gnashing for anguish, and despite, and shame.a__ 
a_oeParadise Lost,a__ vi. 335, seq. 
239. 
a_"_The brazen dome._ See the note on Bk. viii. Page 142. 
240. a_"_For, by the gods! who flies._ Observe the bold ellipsis of a_oehe 
cries,a__ and the transition from the direct to the oblique construction. 
So in Milton:a_" 
a_oeThus at their shady lodge arriva__d, both stood, 
Both turna__d, and under open sky adora__d 
The God that made both sky, air, earth, and heaven, 
Which they beheld, the moona__s resplendent globe, 
And starry pole.a_"Thou also mada__st the night, 
Maker omnipotent, and thou the day.a__ 
Milton, a_oeParadise Lost,a__ Book iv. 
241. 
a_"_So some tall rock._ 
a_oeBut like a rock unmova__d, a rock that braves 
The raging tempest, and the rising wavesa_" 
Proppa__d on himself he stands: his solid sides 
Wash off the sea-weeds, and the sounding tides.a__ 
Drydena__s Virgil, vii. 809. 
242. Protesilaus was the first Greek who fell, slain by Hector, as he 
leaped from the vessel to the Trojan shore. He was buried on the 
Chersonese, near the city of Plagusa. Hygin Fab. ciii. Tzetz. on 
Lycophr. 245, 528. There is a most elegant tribute to his memory in the 
Preface to the Heroica of Philostratus. 
243. a_"_His best beloved._ The following elegant remarks of Thirlwall 
(Greece, vol. i, p. 176 seq.) well illustrate the character of the 
friendship subsisting between these two heroesa_" 
a_oeOne of the noblest and most amiable sides of the Greek character, is 
the readiness with which it lent itself to construct intimate and 
durable friendships, and this is a feature no less prominent in the 
earliest than in later times. It was indeed connected with the 
comparatively low estimation in which female society was held; but the 
devotedness and constancy with which these attachments were maintained, 
was not the less admirable and engaging. The heroic companions whom we 
find celebrated partly by Homer and partly in traditions which, if not 
of equal antiquity, were grounded on the same feeling, seem to have but 
one heart and soul, with scarcely a wish or object apart, and only to 
live as they are always ready to die for one another. It is true that 
the relation between them is not always one of perfect equality; but 
this is a circumstance which, while it often adds a peculiar charm to 
the poetical description, detracts little from the dignity of the idea 
which it presents. Such were the friendships of Hercules and Iolaus, of 
Theseus and Pirithous, of Orestes and Pylades; and though These may owe 
the greater part of their fame to the later epic or even dramatic 
poetry, the moral groundwork undoubtedly subsisted in the period to 
which the traditions are referred. The argument of the Iliad mainly 
turns on the affection of Achilles for Patroclus, whose love for the 
greater hero is only tempered by reverence for his higher birth and his 
unequalled prowess. But the mutual regard which united Idomeneus and 
Meriones, Diomedes and Sthenelus, though, as the persons themselves are 
less important, it is kept more in the back-ground, is manifestly 
viewed by the poet in the same light. The idea of a Greek hero seems 
not to have been thought complete, without such a brother in arms by 
his side.a__a_"Thirlwall, Greece, vol. i. p. 176, seq. 
244. 
a_oeAs hungry wolves with raging appetite, 
Scour through the fields, nea__er fear the stormy nighta_" 
Their whelps at home expect the promised food, 
And long to temper their dry chaps in blooda_" 
So rusha__d we forth at once.a__ 
a_"Drydena__s Virgil, ii. 479. 
245. a_"_The destinies ordain._a_"a_oeIn the mythology, also, of the Iliad, 
purely Pagan as it is, we discover one important truth unconsciously 
involved, which was almost entirely lost from view amidst the nearly 
equal scepticism and credulity of subsequent ages. Zeus or Jupiter is 
popularly to be taken as omnipotent. No distinct empire is assigned to 
fate or fortune; the will of the father of gods and men is absolute and 
uncontrollable. This seems to be the true character of the Homeric 
deity, and it is very necessary that the student of Greek literature 
should bear it constantly in mind. A strong instance in the Iliad 
itself to illustrate this position, is the passage where Jupiter 
laments to Juno the approaching death of Sarpedon. a__Alas me!a__ says he 
a__since it is fated (moira) that Sarpedon, dearest to me of men, should 
be slain by Patroclus, the son of Menoetius! Indeed, my heart is 
divided within me while I ruminate it in my mind, whether having 
snatched him up from out of the lamentable battle, I should not at once 
place him alive in the fertile land of his own Lycia, or whether I 
should now destroy him by the hands of the son of Menoetius!a__ To which 
Juno answersa_"a__Dost thou mean to rescue from death a mortal man, long 
since destined by fate (palai pepromenon)? You may do ita_"but we, the 
rest of the gods, do not sanction it.a__ Here it is clear from both 
speakers, that although Sarpedon is said to be fated to die, Jupiter 
might still, if he pleased, save him, and place him entirely out of the 
reach of any such event, and further, in the alternative, that Jupiter 
himself would destroy him by the hands of another.a__a_"Coleridge, p. 156. 
seq. 
246. a_"_Thrice at the battlements._ a_oeThe art military of the Homeric age 
is upon a level with the state of navigation just described, personal 
prowess decided every thing; the night attack and the ambuscade, 
although much esteemed, were never upon a large scale. The chiefs fight 
in advance, and enact almost as much as the knights of romance. The 
siege of Troy was as little like a modern siege as a captain in the 
guards is like Achilles. There is no mention of a ditch or any other 
line or work round the town, and the wall itself was accessible without 
a ladder. It was probably a vast mound of earth with a declivity 
outwards. Patroclus thrice mounts it in armour. The Trojans are in no 
respects blockaded, and receive assistance from their allies to the 
very end.a__a_"Coleridge, p. 212. 
247. a_"_Ciconians._a_"A people of Thrace, near the Hebrus. 
248. 
a_"_They wept._ 
a_oeFast by the manger stands the inactive steed, 
And, sunk in sorrow, hangs his languid head; 
He stands, and careless of his golden grain, 
Weeps his associates and his master slain.a__ 
Merricka__s Tryphiodorus, v. 18-24. 
a_oeNothing is heard upon the mountains now, 
But pensive herds that for their master low, 
Straggling and comfortless about they rove, 
Unmindful of their pasture and their love.a__ 
Moschus, id. 3, parodied, _ibid._ 
a_oeTo close the pomp, A_thon, the steed of state, 
Is led, the funeral of his lord to wait. 
Strippa__d of his trappings, with a sullen pace 
He walks, and the big tears run rolling down his face.a__ 
Drydena__s Virgil, bk. ii 
249. 
a_"_Some brawny bull._ 
a_oeLike to a bull, that with impetuous spring 
Darts, at the moment when the fatal blow 
Hath struck him, but unable to proceed 
Plunges on either side.a__ 
a_"Careya__s Dante: Hell, c. xii. 
250. This is connected with the earlier part of last book, the regular 
narrative being interrupted by the message of Antilochus and the 
lamentations of Achilles. 
251. a_"_Far in the deep._ So Oceanus hears the lamentations of 
Prometheus, in the play of A_schylus, and comes from the depths of the 
sea to comfort him. 
252. 
Opuntia, a city of Locris. 
253. Quintus Calaber, lib. v., has attempted to rival Homer in his 
description of the shield of the same hero. A few extracts from Mr. 
Dycea__s version (Select Translations, p. 104, seq.) may here be 
introduced. 
a_oeIn the wide circle of the shield were seen 
Refulgent images of various forms, 
The work of Vulcan; who had there described 
The heaven, the ether, and the earth and sea, 
The winds, the clouds, the moon, the sun, apart 
In different stations; and you there might view 
The stars that gem the still-revolving heaven, 
And, under them, the vast expanse of air, 
In which, with outstretcha__d wings, the long-beaka__d bird 
Winnowa__d the gale, as if instinct with life. 
Around the shield the waves of ocean flowa__d, 
The realms of Tethys, which unnumbera__d streams, 
In azure mazes rolling oa__er the earth, 
Seema__d to augment.a__ 
254. a_"_On seats of stone._ a_oeSeveral of the old northern Sagas represent 
the old men assembled for the purpose of judging as sitting on great 
stones, in a circle called the Urtheilsring or gerichtsringa__a_" Grote, 
ii. p. 100, note. On the independence of the judicial office in The 
heroic times, see Thirlwalla__s Greece, vol. i. p. 166. 
255. 
a_"_Another part,_ &c. 
a_oeAnd here 
Were horrid wars depicted; grimly pale 
Were heroes lying with their slaughtera__d steeds 
Upon the ground incarnadina__d with blood. 
Stern stalked Bellona, smeara__d with reeking gore, 
Through charging ranks; beside her Rout was seen, 
And Terror, Discord to the fatal strife 
Inciting men, and Furies breathing flames: 
Nor absent were the Fates, and the tall shape 
Of ghastly Death, round whom did Battles throng, 
Their limbs distilling plenteous blood and sweat; 
And Gorgons, whose long locks were twisting snakes. 
That shot their forky tongues incessant forth. 
Such were the horrors of dire war.a__ 
a_"Dycea__s Calaber. 
256. 
a_"_A field deep furrowed._ 
a_oeHere was a corn field; reapers in a row, 
Each with a sharp-tootha__d sickle in his hand, 
Worka__d busily, and, as the harvest fell, 
Others were ready still to bind the sheaves: 
Yoked to a wain that bore the corn away 
The steers were moving; sturdy bullocks here 
The plough were drawing, and the furrowa__d glebe 
Was black behind them, while with goading wand 
The active youths impella__d them. Here a feast 
Was graved: to the shrill pipe and ringing lyre 
A band of blooming virgins led the dance. 
As if endued with life.a__ 
a_"Dycea__s Calaber. 
257. Coleridge (Greek Classic Poets, p. 182, seq.) has diligently 
compared this with the description of the shield of Hercules by Hesiod. 
He remarks that, a_oewith two or three exceptions, the imagery differs in 
little more than the names and arrangements; and the difference of 
arrangement in the Shield of Hercules is altogether for the worse. The 
natural consecution of the Homeric images needs no exposition: it 
constitutes in itself one of the beauties of the work. The Hesiodic 
images are huddled together without connection or congruity: Mars and 
Pallas are awkwardly introduced among the Centaurs and Lapithae;a_" but 
the gap is wide indeed between them and Apollo with the Muses, waking 
the echoes of Olympus to celestial harmonies; whence however, we are 
hurried back to Perseus, the Gorgons, and other images of war, over an 
arm of the sea, in which the sporting dolphins, the fugitive fishes, 
and the fisherman on the shore with his casting net, are minutely 
represented. As to the Hesiodic images themselves, the leading remark 
is, that they catch at beauty by ornament, and at sublimity by 
exaggeration; and upon the untenable supposition of the genuineness of 
this poem, there is this curious peculiarity, that, in the description 
of scenes of rustic peace, the superiority of Homer is decisivea_"while 
in those of war and tumult it may be thought, perhaps, that the 
Hesiodic poet has more than once the advantage.a__ 
258. a_oeThis legend is one of the most pregnant and characteristic in the 
Grecian Mythology; it explains, according to the religious ideas 
familiar to the old epic poets, both the distinguishing attributes and 
the endless toil and endurances of Heracles, the most renowned 
subjugator of all the semi-divine personages worshipped by the 
Hellenes,a_"a being of irresistible force, and especially beloved by 
Zeus, yet condemned constantly to labour for others and to obey the 
commands of a worthless and cowardly persecutor. His recompense is 
reserved to the close of his career, when his afflicting trials are 
brought to a close: he is then admitted to the godhead, and receives in 
marriage Hebe.a__a_"Grote, vol. i. p. 128. 
259. 
a_"_Ambrosia._ 
a_oeThe blue-eyed maid, 
In eva__ry breast new vigour to infuse. 
Brings nectar tempera__d with ambrosial dews.a__ 
Merricka__s Tryphiodorus, vi. 249. 
260. a_oeHell is naked before him, and destruction hath no covering. He 
stretcheth out the north over the empty place, and hangeth the earth 
upon nothing. He bindeth up the waters in his thick clouds; and the 
cloud is not rent under them.a__ Job xxvi. 6-8. 
261. 
a_oeSwift from his throne the infernal monarch ran, 
All pale and trembling, lest the race of man, 
Slain by Jovea__s wrath, and led by Hermesa__ rod, 
Should fill (a countless throng!) his dark abode.a__ 
Merricka__s Tryphiodorus, vi. 769, sqq. 
262. These words seem to imply the old belief, that the Fates might be 
delayed, but never wholly set aside. 
263. It was anciently believed that it was dangerous, if not fatal, to 
behold a deity. See Exod. xxxiii. 20; Judg. xiii. 22. 
264. 
a_oeEre Ilium and the Trojan towa__rs arose, 
In humble vales they built their soft abodes.a__ 
Drydena__s Virgil, iii. 150. 
265. 
a_"_Along the level seas._ Compare Virgila__s description of Camilla, who 
a_oeOutstrippa__d the winds in speed upon the plain, 
Flew oa__er the field, nor hurt the bearded grain: 
She swept the seas, and, as she skimma__d along, 
Her flying feet unbathed on billows hung.a__ 
Dryden, vii. 1100. 
266. a_"_The future father._ a_oeA_neas and Antenor stand distinguished from 
the other Trojans by a dissatisfaction with Priam, and a sympathy with 
the Greeks, which is by Sophocles and others construed as treacherous 
collusion,a_"a suspicion indirectly glanced at, though emphatically 
repelled, in the A_neas of Virgil.a__a_"Grote, i. p. 427. 
267. 
Neptune thus recounts his services to A_neas: 
a_oeWhen your A_neas fought, but fought with odds 
Of force unequal, and unequal gods: 
I spread a cloud before the victora__s sight, 
Sustaina__d the vanquisha__d, and secured his flighta_" 
Even then secured him, when I sought with joy 
The vowa__d destruction of ungrateful Troy.a__ 
Drydena__s Virgil, v. 1058. 
268. a_"_On Polydore._ Euripides, Virgil, and others, relate that 
Polydore was sent into Thrace, to the house of Polymestor, for 
protection, being the youngest of Priama__s sons, and that he was 
treacherously murdered by his host for the sake of the treasure sent 
with him. 
269. a_oePerhaps the boldest excursion of Homer into this region of 
poetical fancy is the collision into which, in the twenty-first of the 
Iliad, he has brought the river god Scamander, first with Achilles, and 
afterwards with Vulcan, when summoned by Juno to the heroa__s aid. The 
overwhelming fury of the stream finds the natural interpretation in the 
character of the mountain torrents of Greece and Asia Minor. Their 
wide, shingly beds are in summer comparatively dry, so as to be easily 
forded by the foot passenger. But a thunder-shower in the mountains, 
unobserved perhaps by the traveller on the plain, may suddenly immerse 
him in the flood of a mighty river. The rescue of Achilles by the fiery 
arms of Vulcan scarcely admits of the same ready explanation from 
physical causes. Yet the subsiding of the flood at the critical moment 
when the heroa__s destruction appeared imminent, might, by a slight 
extension of the figurative parallel, be ascribed to a god symbolic of 
the influences opposed to all atmospheric moisture.a__a_"Mure, vol. i. p. 
480, sq. 
270. Wood has observed, that a_oethe circumstance of a falling tree, which 
is described as reaching from one of its banks to the other, affords a 
very just idea of the breadth of the Scamander.a__ 
271. a_"_Ignominious._ Drowning, as compared with a death in the field of 
battle, was considered utterly disgraceful. 
272. 
a_"_Beneath a caldron._ 
a_oeSo, when with crackling flames a caldron fries, 
The bubbling waters from the bottom rise. 
Above the brims they force their fiery way; 
Black vapours climb aloft, and cloud the day.a__ 
Drydena__s Virgil, vii. 644. 
273. a_oeThis tale of the temporary servitude of particular gods, by order 
of Jove, as a punishment for misbehaviour, recurs not unfrequently 
among the incidents of the Mythical world.a__a_"Grote, vol. i. p. 156. 
274. 
a_"_Not half so dreadful._ 
a_oeOn the other side, 
Incensed with indignation, Satan stood 
Unterrified, and like a comet burna__d, 
That fires the length of Ophiuchus huge 
In the arctic sky, and from his horrid hair 
Shakes pestilence and war.a__ 
a_"a_oeParadise Lost,a__ xi. 708. 
275. a_oeAnd thus his own undaunted mind explores.a__a_"a_oeParadise Lost,a__ vi. 
113. 
276. The example of Nausicaa, in the Odyssey, proves that the duties of 
the laundry were not thought derogatory, even from the dignity of a 
princess, in the heroic times. 
277. 
a_"_Hesper shines with keener light._ 
a_oeFairest of stars, last in the train of night, 
If better thou belong not to the dawn.a__ 
a_oeParadise Lost,a__ v. 166. 
278. Such was his fate. After chasing the Trojans into the town, he was 
slain by an arrow from the quiver of Paris, directed under the unerring 
auspices of Apollo. The greatest efforts were made by the Trojans to 
possess themselves of the body, which was however rescued and borne off 
to the Grecian camp by the valour of Ajax and Ulysses. Thetis stole 
away the body, just as the Greeks were about to burn it with funeral 
honours, and conveyed it away to a renewed life of immortality in the 
isle of Leuke in the Euxine. 
279. a_"_Astyanax,_ i.e. the _city-king_ or guardian. It is amusing that 
Plato, who often finds fault with Homer without reason, should have 
copied this twaddling etymology into his Cratylus. 
280. This book has been closely imitated by Virgil in his fifth book, 
but it is almost useless to attempt a selection of passages for 
comparison. 
281. a_"_Thrice in order led._ This was a frequent rite at funerals. The 
Romans had the same custom, which they called _decursio._ Plutarch 
states that Alexander, in after times, renewed these same honours to 
the memory of Achilles himself. 
282. a_"_And swore._ Literally, and called Orcus, the god of oaths, to 
witness. See Buttmann, Lexilog, p. 436. 
283. 
a_oeO, long expected by thy friends! from whence 
Art thou so late returna__d for our defence? 
Do we behold thee, wearied as we are 
With length of labours, and with, toils of war? 
After so many funerals of thy own, 
Art thou restored to thy declining town? 
But say, what wounds are these? what new disgrace 
Deforms the manly features of thy face?a__ 
Dryden, xi. 369. 
284. 
a_"_Like a thin smoke._ Virgil, Georg. iv. 72. 
a_oeIn vain I reach my feeble hands to join 
In sweet embracesa_"ah! no longer thine! 
She said, and from his eyes the fleeting fair 
Retired, like subtle smoke dissolved in air.a__ 
Dryden. 
285. 
So Milton:a_" 
a_oeSo eagerly the fiend 
Oa__er bog, oa__er steep, through strait, rough, dense, or rare, 
With head, hands, wings, or feet pursues his way, 
And swims, or sinks, or wades, or creeps, or flies.a__ 
a_oeParadise Lost,a__ ii. 948. 
286. 
a_oeAn ancient forest, for the work designa__d 
(The shady covert of the savage kind). 
The Trojans found: the sounding axe is placed: 
Firs, pines, and pitch-trees, and the towa__ring pride 
Of forest ashes, feel the fatal stroke, 
And piercing wedges cleave the stubborn oak. 
High trunks of trees, fella__d from the steepy crown 
Of the bare mountains, roll with ruin down.a__ 
Drydena__s Virgil, vi. 261. 
287. a_"_He vowed._ This was a very ancient custom. 
288. The height of the tomb or pile was a great proof of the dignity of 
the deceased, and the honour in which he was held. 
289. On the prevalence of this cruel custom amongst the northern 
nations, see Mallet, p. 213. 
290. a_"_And calls the spirit._ Such was the custom anciently, even at 
the Roman funerals. 
a_oeHail, O ye holy manes! hail again, 
Paternal ashes, now revived in vain.a__ 
Drydena__s Virgil, v. 106. 
291. Virgil, by making the boaster vanquished, has drawn a better moral 
from this episode than Homer. The following lines deserve comparison:a_" 
a_oeThe haughty Dares in the lists appears: 
Walking he strides, his head erected bears: 
His nervous arms the weighty gauntlet wield, 
And loud applauses echo through the field. 
* * * * 
Such Dares was, and such he strode along, 
And drew the wonder of the gazing throng 
His brawny breast and ample chest he shows; 
His lifted arms around his head he throws, 
And deals in whistling air his empty blows. 
His match is sought, but, through the trembling band, 
No one dares answer to the proud demand. 
Presuming of his force, with sparkling eyes, 
Already he devours the promised prize. 
* * * * 
If none my matchless valour dares oppose, 
How long shall Dares wait his dastard foes?a__ 
Drydena__s Virgil, v. 486, seq. 
292. 
a_oeThe gauntlet-fight thus ended, from the shore 
His faithful friends unhappy Dares bore: 
His mouth and nostrils poura__d a purple flood, 
And pounded teeth came rushing with his blood.a__ 
Drydena__s Virgil, v. 623. 
293. a_oeTroilus is only once named in the Iliad; he was mentioned also in 
the Cypriad but his youth, beauty, and untimely end made him an object 
of great interest with the subsequent poets.a__a_"Grote, i, p. 399. 
294. Milton has rivalled this passage describing the descent of 
Gabriel, a_oeParadise Lost,a__ bk. v. 266, seq. 
a_oeDown thither prone in flight 
He speeds, and through the vast ethereal sky 
Sails between worlds and worlds, with steady wing, 
Now on the polar winds, then with quick fan 
Winnows the buxom air. * * * * 
* * * * 
At once on tha__ eastern cliff of Paradise 
He lights, and to his proper shape returns 
A seraph winga__d. * * * * 
Like Maiaa__s son he stood, 
And shook his plumes, that heavenly fragrance filla__d 
The circuit wide.a__ 
Virgil, A_n. iv. 350:a_" 
a_oeHermes obeys; with golden pinions binds 
His flying feet, and mounts the western winds: 
And whether oa__er the seas or earth he flies, 
With rapid force they bear him down the skies 
But first he grasps within his awful hand 
The mark of sovereign power, his magic wand; 
With this he draws the ghost from hollow graves; 
With this he drives them from the Stygian waves: 
* * * * 
Thus arma__d, the god begins his airy race, 
And drives the racking clouds along the liquid space.a__ 
Dryden. 
295. In reference to the whole scene that follows, the remarks of 
Coleridge are well worth reading:a_" 
a_oeBy a close study of life, and by a true and natural mode of expressing 
everything, Homer was enabled to venture upon the most peculiar and 
difficult situations, and to extricate himself from them with the 
completest success. The whole scene between Achilles and Priam, when 
the latter comes to the Greek camp for the purpose of redeeming the 
body of Hector, is at once the most profoundly skilful, and yet the 
simplest and most affecting passage in the Iliad. Quinctilian has taken 
notice of the following speech of Priam, the rhetorical artifice of 
which is so transcendent, that if genius did not often, especially in 
oratory, unconsciously fulfil the most subtle precepts of criticism, we 
might be induced, on this account alone, to consider the last book of 
the Iliad as what is called spurious, in other words, of later date 
than the rest of the poem. Observe the exquisite taste of Priam in 
occupying the mind of Achilles, from the outset, with the image of his 
father; in gradually introducing the parallel of his own situation; 
and, lastly, mentioning Hectora__s name when he perceives that the hero 
is softened, and then only in such a manner as to flatter the pride of 
the conqueror. The ego da__eleeinoteros per, and the apusato aecha 
geronta, are not exactly like the tone of the earlier parts of the 
Iliad. They are almost too fine and pathetic. The whole passage defies 
translation, for there is that about the Greek which has no name, but 
which is of so fine and ethereal a subtlety that it can only be felt in 
the original, and is lost in an attempt to transfuse it into another 
language.a__a_"Coleridge, p. 195. 
296. a_oeAchillesa__ ferocious treatment of the corpse of Hector cannot but 
offend as referred to the modern standard of humanity. The heroic age, 
however, must be judged by its own moral laws. Retributive vengeance on 
the dead, as well as the living, was a duty inculcated by the religion 
of those barbarous times which not only taught that evil inflicted on 
the author of evil was a solace to the injured man; but made the 
welfare of the soul after death dependent on the fate of the body from 
which it had separated. Hence a denial of the rites essential to the 
soula__s admission into the more favoured regions of the lower world was 
a cruel punishment to the wanderer on the dreary shores of the infernal 
river. The complaint of the ghost of Patroclus to Achilles, of but a 
brief postponement of his own obsequies, shows how efficacious their 
refusal to the remains of his destroyer must have been in satiating the 
thirst of revenge, which, even after death, was supposed to torment the 
dwellers in Hades. Hence before yielding up the body of Hector to 
Priam, Achilles asks pardon of Patroclus for even this partial cession 
of his just rights of retribution.a__a_"Mure, vol. i. 289. 
297. 
Such was the fate of Astyanax, when Troy was taken. 
a_oeHere, from the towa__r by stern Ulysses thrown, 
Andromache bewaila__d her infant son.a__ 
Merricka__s Tryphiodorus, v. 675. 
298. The following observations of Coleridge furnish a most gallant and 
interesting view of Helena__s charactera_" 
a_oeFew things are more interesting than to observe how the same hand that 
has given us the fury and inconsistency of Achilles, gives us also the 
consummate elegance and tenderness of Helen. She is through the Iliad a 
genuine lady, graceful in motion and speech, noble in her associations, 
full of remorse for a fault for which higher powers seem responsible, 
yet grateful and affectionate towards those with whom that fault had 
committed her. I have always thought the following speech in which 
Helen laments Hector, and hints at her own invidious and unprotected 
situation in Troy, as almost the sweetest passage in the poem. It is 
another striking instance of that refinement of feeling and softness of 
tone which so generally distinguish the last book of the Iliad from the 
rest.a__a_"Classic Poets, p. 198, seq. 
299. a_oeAnd here we part with Achilles at the moment best calculated to 
exalt and purify our impression of his character. We had accompanied 
him through the effervescence, undulations, and final subsidence of his 
stormy passions. We now leave him in repose and under the full 
influence of the more amiable affections, while our admiration of his 
great qualities is chastened by the reflection that, within a few short 
days the mighty being in whom they were united was himself to be 
suddenly cut off in the full vigour of their exercise. 
The frequent and touching allusions, interspersed throughout the Iliad, 
to the speedy termination of its heroa__s course, and the moral on the 
vanity of human life which they indicate, are among the finest 
evidences of the spirit of ethic unity by which the whole framework of 
the poem is united.a__a_"Mure, vol. i. p 201. 
300. Cowper says,a_"a_oeI cannot take my leave of this noble poem without 
expressing how much I am struck with the plain conclusion of it. It is 
like the exit of a great man out of company, whom he has entertained 
magnificently; neither pompous nor familiar; not contemptuous, yet 
without much ceremony.a__ Coleridge, p. 227, considers the termination of 
a_oeParadise Losta__ somewhat similar. 
